<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		
		

		<meta charset="utf-8"></meta>
		<title>Goldenframe Propaganda</title>
		<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/style.css" class="day" title="day"/>
		
 		
	</head>
	<body>
			<div>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
During the period of World Wars propaganda has been one of the main tools for manipulating public opinion. The content mainly covered militaristic activities, rasist and (anti)religious ideologies, education of the youth, freedom of speech and the ultimate power of totalitarian leaders. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Especially in Bolschevik Russia, propoganda had developed into a form of art,
videly popular among local painters (notably Dadaists). The ideas then spread into Western
Europe to serve local regimes. Commonly shared design concepts were predefined
propoganda symbolism as well as similar (red, black, white) color schemes. Even if represented ideas
were mainly designed to serve as weapons between Eastern and Western blocks, they shared same visual means of expressing ideologies. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
In various parts of the world, also mainly due to international
propaganda as well as local circumstances (Fascist repressions in France and Italy, Soviet
occupations in Eastern Europe) the Super States and their regimes were regarded differently.
E.g. The USSR which was welcomed as Europe’s saviour and the winner of the World War 2, is still considered as one of the biggest repressors in the East, where Nazis were actually expected to come and "liberate" countries from communist totalitarism.  </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Golden Frame Propaganda is an unpretentious conceptual reflection of how similar the
ideologies and ways of mass control were independently of the differences between regimes. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
It is only that Propaganda is never unpretentious. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
