<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		
		

		<meta charset="utf-8"></meta>
		<title>Goldenframe Propaganda</title>
		<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles/style.css" class="day" title="day"/>
		
 		
	</head>
	<body>
			<div>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-1"><span class="char-style-override-1">Golden Frame Propaganda</span><span class="char-style-override-2"></span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-2">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-1"><span class="char-style-override-3">Vytautas Jankauskas</span><span class="char-style-override-2"></span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-1"><span class="char-style-override-4">HEAD Geneva</span><span></span></p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-3">Open-Source Publishing Workshop</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-3">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
During the period of World Wars propaganda has been one of the main tools of controlled </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
information and the manipulation of public opinion. The content mainly covered militaristic</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
activities, rasist and atheist or cultist ideologies, education of the youth, freedom of speech and </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
the ultimate power of totalitarian leaders. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Subliminal messages often targeted enemy countries and alliaces. Principal concepts</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
covered the differences (or more particularly, inferiority) between various forms of goverment, </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
economy, state religion,nationalism, etc. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Especially in Bolschevik Russia, propoganda had developed into an independent form of art, </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
videly popular among local painters (mostly Dadaists). The ideas then spread into Western</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Europe to serve local regimes. The interesting commonly shared design concept was popular</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
propoganda symbolism as well as similar color schemes. Even if the represented ideas</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
were mainly designed to serve as weapons between Eastern and Western blocks, they </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
interestingly shared same means of expressing ideologies. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Another interesting factor is that in different parts of world, also mainly due to international</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
propaganda and also local circumstances (Fascist repressions in France and Italy, Soviet </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
occupations in Eastern Europe) the Super States and their regimes were regarded differently. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
In other words, the USSR which was regarded as Europe’s saviour and the winner of the </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
World War 2, is still considered as one of the biggest repressors in the East, and to this date</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
the tention between both sides remains. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
Golden Frame Propaganda is a unpretentious conceptual reflection of how similar the </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">
ideologies and ways of mass control were independently of the differences between regimes. </p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">&#160;</p>
			<p class="Basic-Paragraph para-style-override-4">It is only that Propaganda is never unpretentious. </p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
