<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8"></meta>
		<title>Un Epub dont vous êtes le manipulateur</title>
		<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" class="day" title="day"/> 

		<style>

		p{
		  font-family: "Museo";
		  font-size: 30px;  
		  color:3333cc;
		}
		@media (orientation: landscape) {
		  p { text-shadow: 3px 4px 1px #cccccc; transition: 2s;}
		}

		@media (orientation: portrait){ 
		p {-webkit-transform: rotateX(45deg);
			-webkit-transform: rotateY(90deg);}
		}


		</style>


</head>

	<body>
		<div class="entete">  		
		<h1>Un Epub dont vous êtes l'agitateur</h1>
		</div>
		<div><h2>This is another chapter of the Epub</h2>

		<h3>It becomes more interactive. Test the orientation of the reader. Will it work. I'm not sure.<br></br>

  		
 		 Test what's happening when you look at this text as a landscape or as a portrait. </h3>
		</div>
  		
		<p>
		" Reader, you have found again the book you were seeking ; now you can pick up the broken thread; the smile returns to your lips. But do you imagine it can go on in this way, this story ? No, not that of the novel ! Yours! How long are you going to let yourself be dragged passively by the plot ? You had flung yourself into the action, filled with adventurous impulses : and then ? Your function was quickly reduced to that of one who records situations decided by others, who submits to whims, finds himself involved in events that elude his control. "</p>

		<p class="legend">Italo Calvino<br></br>
		If on a winter’s night a traveller (1979)<br></br>
		Se una notte d'inverno un viaggiatore<br></br>
		translated from the Italian by William Weaver (1983)</p>

		<div class="link_footer">	Choose between this
   			 <a href="EpubStory5.xhtml">link </a><br />
			or this
 			 <a href="EpubStory3.xhtml">one</a><br />
		You don't know where your'e going, but the Epub knows.
  		</div>
	</body>
</html>
