<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8"></meta>
		<title>Un Epub dont vous êtes le lecteur</title>
		<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" class="day" title="day"/> 

	</head>

<body>
	<div class="entete">
	<h1>Un Epub dont vous êtes le lecteur</h1>
  	</div>
	  
	<div>
		
		<h2>Welcome ! This is the starting point to your journey into the Epub 3 format ! </h2>
  	

		 <p>This Epub shows exercices and experiences I've made about various possibilities, from a simple text reader, to more interactive relations bewtween the Ebook and you, the Ereader. <br />I wish you a nice Trip !</p>
<br />
	<p>	To begin with, here's a simple text (the brief of our workshop with OSP). </p>    
		
	<h4>Self-conscious-layout</h4>
	    <p style="text-align: justify; font-size: 14px; line-height: 20px; margin: 10px 0px 20px;"> 
		Within  the issue of 'Responsive Design', we propose to explore the ePub-format (a standard for digital publications / books) and its implications for  media design. Radically different from a traditional book, but much like HTML, an ePub publication adjusts itself to the capabilties of the reading device and the settings of the user. ePub distuinguishes itself in various ways from the other digital format used for digital  publications: PDF (Portable Document Format). PDF and ePub propose a fundamentally different approach towards layout. PDF uses a 'fixed' page / layout, which gives the designer a great amount of control, but leaves less flexibility for the digital object to adapt itself to different (digital) contexts. The ePub format describes the layout (in the spirit of LaTeX and HTML) in a more generous way (flow-based layout), allowing the document to re-adjust itself towards the functionalities and properties of the reading-device.
<br />
The  ePub format is designed so that it can be opened in text editors to access it's code. As with a web page layout, where the handling of HTML tags is part of the process of the designer, the ePub format allows the  designer to edit directly in the code. Dealing with code becomes even a  necessity when dealing with the interactive features of eBooks, which are defined in the standard but still little explored. What OSP proposes in the workshop, is to test different paths, using both visual tools and direct interventions into the code to and find out where the limits of the ePub paradigm lie.
<br />
ePubs  use CSS, just like websites, and can make use of the associated  technology of media queries. Media queries allow you to adjust your  message towards the properties of the device. It enables you to go a  step further than just scaling. In traditional print based design we  also deal with scale: a message might appear on a poster or a flyer, or the same text might first be published in a newspaper and then in a  book. All these media deal with growth in multiple ways, each medium comes with it's own 'scale': in content, detail and time spent by the  viewer / reader.
<br />
Accomodating  for these differents specificities has traditionally been done by  designers again and again for each medium. Now the designer needs to  imagine the possibilities beforehand, and create a self-aware system  that is able to interpret its surroundings. The self-aware publication  can, aware of these different factors, adjust itself towards different  media. Can you turn a poster into a book of 200 pages? How do you deal  with the different scales of content? And when we have self-aware publications, we can also imagine them to perform information hostile to  the users. What happens if a book radically censors itself when it's  read on a smartphone? Can we expand  this self-awareness (geo-awareness, time-awareness) to re-introduce limits wihthin the limitless of the  digtal. Perhaps a sort of DRM gone wild?<br />
	</p>
	
	</div>
	
	<div class="warning"> Warning ! All the next links won't work if your reader isn't connected to the Internet.
	</div>
	<div>	<ul>		<li>General references on ePub experiments<br />
				 <a href="http://fr.flossmanuals.net/creer-un-epub/">- Tutorial on creating ePubs with several different tools (in French)</a></li>

			<li><a href="http://pzwart3.wdka.hro.nl/wiki/KindlesDream">- Piet Zwart workshop ‘Do Kindles Dream of Spirit Duplicators’, documentation </a></li>

		<li>Dynamic generation of eBooks:<br/>
		
<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/14/business/media/14link.html?pagewanted=all_r=0">-He Wrote 200,000 Books (but Computers Did Some of the Work) - New York Times (2008)</a></li>

		<li>You Tube comments ebooks generator<br />
		<a href="http://traumawien.at/ghostwriters/">- TRAUMAWIEN GHOSTWRITERS</a></li>

		<li> General reflection on eBooks:<br/>
		<a href="http://www.sprintbeyondthebook.com/">- Sprint Beyond the Book | The future of authoring books (2013)</a></li>

		<li>Interactive/self-aware features of ebooks:<br />
		<a href="http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2013/10/polemic-how-readers-will-disco.html">- Charlie Pope: How readers will discover books in future </a></li>

		<li><a href="http://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/04/big-ereader-is-watching-you">- Big e-reader is watching you | The Guardian (2012)</a></li>

		<li><a href="http://www.idpf.org/epub/30/spec/epub30-overview.html">- ePub 3.0 specification</a></li>

		<li><a href="http://toc.oreilly.com/2013/02/oreillys-journey-to-epub-3.html">- cf O’Reilly </a> </li>

		<li><a href="http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/tutorials/x-epubtut/index.html">-Build a digital book with EPUB -- IBM </a></li>

	</ul>
		
	<ul>	<li>Self-reflexive book links<br />
		Story-telling self-reflexive</li>
		<li>-Italo Calvino, If on a winter's night a traveler (Se una notte d'inverno un viaggiatore), Einaudi, 1979</li>
		<li>— A history (excerpts) of self-reflexive pages in litterature</li>
		<li><a href="http://jamesbrookdesign.blogspot.be/2011/04/on-self-reflexive-page.html">-On the Self-Reflexive Page, Louis Lüthi, Roma Publications, 2010</a></li>

		<li><a href="http://p-dpa.tumblr.com/post/62904818512/networked-optimization-silvio-lorusso-sebastian"> — Networked Optimization</a></li>

		<li><a href="http://p-dpa.tumblr.com/post/50978156629/booklab13-skeuomorphic-library-a-typology-of">— Skeuomorphism</a></li>


		<li>— Print-On-Demand self-reflexive: Dear Lulu, Hochschule Darmstadt, Practise, 2008</li>
		<li>— Self-reflexive paper-book</li>
		
		<li><a href="http://fionabanner.com/works/anatomybook/index.htm">Fiona Banner, Anatomy of a Book, 2009 </a></li>

		<li><a href=" http://bcc.stdin.fr/LaCarteOuLeTerritoire/">—Find the text in other books </a></li>
		<li><a href="http://p-dpa.tumblr.com/post/35330754547/mikko-kuorinki-order-of-things">— Alphabetising</a></li>
		<li><a href="http://code.google.com/p/epub-samples/downloads/list>">Example epubs 3 </a></li>

		</ul>
	<div class="warning"> End of the Warning</div>
	</div>


  <div class="link_footer">
	To continue reading, choose one of those two internal links:
    <ul><li><a href="EpubStory2.xhtml">A mysterious link</a></li>
    <li><a href="EpubStory5.xhtml">Another mysterious link</a></li></ul>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
