<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>unlike-us-reader-3</title>
		<link href="css/unlike-us-reader.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<style>
#grad1
{
/* IE10 Consumer Preview */ 
background-image: -ms-linear-gradient(top, #FFFFFF 0%, #66FFD1 100%);

/* Mozilla Firefox */ 
background-image: -moz-linear-gradient(top, #FFFFFF 0%, #66FFD1 100%);

/* Opera */ 
background-image: -o-linear-gradient(top, #FFFFFF 0%, #66FFD1 100%);

/* Webkit (Safari/Chrome 10) */ 
background-image: -webkit-gradient(linear, left top, left bottom, color-stop(0, #FFFFFF), color-stop(1, #66FFD1));

/* Webkit (Chrome 11+) */ 
background-image: -webkit-linear-gradient(top, #FFFFFF 0%, #66FFD1 100%);

/* W3C Markup, IE10 Release Preview */ 
background-image: linear-gradient(to bottom, #FFFFFF 0%, #66FFD1 100%);
}
</style>
	</head>
	<body id="unlike-us-reader" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<h1 class="article-title" id="toc_marker-2"><a id="The-Most-Precious-Good--in-the-Era-of--Social-Technologies"/>Technologies Social of Era the in Good Precious Most The</h1>
			<p class="slash">/</p>

			<h2 class="author-name"><a href="unlike-us-reader-34.xhtml#stiegler">5614205734</a></h2>

		</div>
		<div>

		<div id="grad1">
			<p>What we usually call ‘social networks’ – a paradoxical appellation, as we shall see, – lie at the core of what constitutes the social.<sup><a id="footnote-294455-1-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-1">1</a></sup> The appellation itself is paradoxical since we are talking here about digital networks which appear to shortcut the traditional networks of proximity that have defined what is social from times immemorial. And we will easily admit that they are core to the social when following Aristotle who said that they pertain to the <em>philia</em>, itself the fundament of the social.</p>
			<p>Aristotle tells us – and all traditions currently in vogue, including Jacques Derrida in <em>The Politics of Friendship</em> follow him in this respect – that friendship (i.e. <em>philia</em>) is the paramount social link without which society would not exist. Jean Lauxerois, however, strongly disagreed with translating <em>philia</em> with <em>friendship</em>. I did not follow him, initially. But reflecting on social networks I ended up seeing that he was right:<sup><a id="footnote-294455-2-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-2">2</a></sup></p>
			<p>social. the constitutes what of core the at lie – see, shall we as appellation, paradoxical a – networks’ ‘social call usually we What<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-1" id="footnote-294455-1-backlink">1</a></sup> the to pertain they that said who Aristotle following when social the to core are they that admit easily will we And immemorial. times from social is what defined have that proximity of networks traditional the shortcut to appear which networks digital about here talking are we since paradoxical is itself appellation The <em>philia</em>social. the of fundament the itself ,</p>
			<p> in Derrida Jacques including vogue, in currently traditions all and – us tells Aristotle<em>Friendship of Politics The</em> (i.e. friendship that – respect this in him follow <em>philia</em> translating with disagreed strongly however, Lauxerois, Jean exist. not would society which without link social paramount the is )<em>philia</em> with <em>friendship</em>right: was he that seeing up ended I networks social on reflecting But initially. him, follow not did I .<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-2" id="footnote-294455-2-backlink">2</a></sup></p>
			<ul>
				<li class="unordered-list"><span class="bullet">–</span>‘philotès’, friendship: for word Greek a actually is there because Firstly </li>
				<li class="unordered-list-last"><span class="bullet">–</span> every and each that states Aristotle because Secondly <em>being living animated</em> a in partakes <em>philia</em>kin. its with <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-3" id="footnote-294455-3-backlink">3</a></sup></li>
			</ul>
			<p class="quote"><em>Philia</em>world. the to comes she or he moment the from beings living other to bound necessity by is animal, or human whether being, living every way the designates It it. understand we way the friendship mere than more is Lauxerois, writes ,<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-4" id="footnote-294455-4-backlink">4</a></sup></p>
			<p><em>Philia</em>philia. of case particular one only represented Aristotle, to according again humans, yet humans, bonded what Aristotle to according was </p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> of forms new generally, more or networks, social call we what through arise friendship of forms new whether enquire to like would we where especially point, first this clarify to order In<em>philia</em> His Uexküll. von Jacob of company the in detour a make we suggest I ,<em>description</em> animal of aspect one includes <em>philia</em> of possibility open fundamentally the as <em>adoption</em> :</p>
			<p class="quote">[“ “companion” a lives entire their them around have jackdaws Gregarious<em>socius</em>activity. new each for gap that fill can companion substitute new a fact, in and, companion,” “substitute a on takes it species, own its of one find cannot it if but, companion the without go not does it alone, up brought is jackdaw a if Even actions. of sorts all undertake they whom with ”]</p>
			<p class="quote">[“ companions flight its became then who crows, flying joined it work, not did that When back. his behind just up straight flying by fashion, jackdaw typical in it with fly to Lorenz persuade to attempted it flight, longer a for prepared Tschock Whenever fed. Tschock which and companion adoptive its became which jackdaw young a found it Later, her. of front in dance courtship characteristic the performed and companion its as maid the chose it feed, own its get to learned had it Once fed. be to wanted it when him to called it place; the over all him followed It mother-companion. its as himself Lorenz owner] [his had Tschock jackdaw the youth, its In<em>socii</em>”].<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-5" id="footnote-294455-5-backlink">5</a></sup></p>
			<p>states: Aristotle Lauxerois, to According</p>
			<p class="quote"><em>philia</em>city-states. like – communities human different within and between obtain that relationships the to also but – family same the of members to as birds, say sort, same the of animals to both pertaining as regarded be should <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-6" id="footnote-294455-6-backlink">6</a></sup></p>
			<p> is it what ourselves ask must we themselves, to equal as species fellow not are who beings living adopt to jackdaws for possible is it if Now,<em>exactly</em> the constitutes that <em>philia</em> of <em>friends become can who those</em> be can who beings those mean we friends By .<em>absence and desire, love, by affected</em> to there, from And experience. an always is lack’) ‘the manque’, ‘le as Lacan by (conceptualized object desired the which of – <em>affection this in themselves individuate</em> become they which by ,<em>psychically</em> that, in and individuated, <em>affected singularly</em>.</p>
			<p> of passage the to pertains issue this terms, Simondon’s In<em>vital</em> to individuation <em>collective and psychical</em>Simondon: writes individuation, Vital individuation. </p>
			<p class="quote">individuals. multiple of group differentiated very a of others in and individual, single a of cases some in consist can this and reality, concrete sole the then constitutes unity Vital integrator. as functions group the integration: external by and with augmented is being individual the within integration internal case, latter the In beings. different between exists which relationship organic the through or being, individual an of level the at either place take can […]<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-7" id="footnote-294455-7-backlink">7</a></sup></p>
			<p> specific very the describe to on goes Simondon note, a In<em>philia</em>ants: white the of </p>
			<p class="quote">organism. single one were they if as act they group, a as working world: animal the in found structures elaborate most the build ants white constitution, neuronal simple rather their Despite<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-8" id="footnote-294455-8-backlink">8</a></sup></p>
			<p> vital of terms in think therefore must We<em>process a as individuation</em>individuals: living of) nature (the of terms in than rather ,</p>
			<p class="quote">unit. vital the as regarded be should whole a as group the but individual, single the Not […] individuation of levels successive on depending layers, many having as seen be should individuality biology, in if as is it individual; an than rather sub-individual a actually is individual an called is biology in What<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-9" id="footnote-294455-9-backlink">9</a></sup></p>
			<p> of conception another in results way this seen Individuation<em>philia</em>individuation. physical to relation in individuation vital in result typically would this all – animals of pairs gangs, herds, sorts, all of colonies corals, body, one into agglomerating cells of life, animal or plant of) kinds (all of together grouping the to relates It term. this under understood tentatively is what of and ,</p>
			<p> a by plagued community a becoming without individuals of together banding a in consists individuation vital But<em>deficit community</em> is individuation vital individuation, social or collective, and psychical to Contrary humans. word: another with life, technical called Canguilhelm what to belong which arise phenomena psychical where community of deficit the – friendship to susceptible are who those of hallmark the is Bataille, George to according which, <em>outside from caused one or one teratological a than other disjunction of possibility no with and bonding, a always</em>.</p>
			<p> always time same the at is that individuation an meaning community, a of bereft are who those of community the unfit and fit time, same the at individuation, collective and psychical individuation, vital this to opposed as And,<em>augmented</em> also yet <em>diminished</em> an individuation, vital to contrarily becomes, individuation collective and psychical – networks’ ‘social call we what of expansion the to regard with especially friendly, be to believe to able be to like would we which or friendly, be to like would we which future a future, common a share to attempt our in be to believe we that or be, to try least at or are, we that beings of sort the of individuation the is that – individuation technical by <em>alteration</em> a :<em>becoming-other</em> called Lacan, then and first, Freud which condition the under existing is, that Other, big the of other, the of presence the in ,<em>Ding das</em>.</p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> between difference precise the about said be may whatever and – issues translation these about said be may Whatever<em>philia</em> and <em>philotès</em> between ,<em>philia</em> and adoption animal as <em>philia</em> of sense the in friendship, which within adoption, human as <em>philotès</em> in originated which network social a of part be to order in – instance specific a only be would ,<em>engineering, social</em><sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-10" id="footnote-294455-10-backlink">10</a></sup> the of way by ‘reputation’, one’s of carriers and addressees rather but ‘acquaintances’, even not ‘contacts’, of sense the in understood better be should which ‘friends’ – friends’ of ‘network your calls technology relational this what describe first should one networks’, ‘social are that technologies relational sophisticated the meaning <em>networks of effect network</em>‘friends’. my automatically ‘friends’ my of ‘friends’ the makes which </p>
			<p> these about here enquire also should We<em>technologies reputation</em> the called Greeks (ancient) the what taking by – engineering social of technologies relational sophisticated are Rheingold Howard to according which – <em>kleos</em><sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-11" id="footnote-294455-11-backlink">11</a></sup> as understood Aristotle what to correspond nicely does think, would I which, networks’ of ‘network of type this affects precisely effect’ ‘network this how analyze to be would issue pressing very another And further. this pursue to here time and room lack we but etc., rumor, posterity, glory, reputation, as translated variously is Kleos point. starting our as <em>philia</em> ‘humans’. as moderns by known also beings, noetic mortal, amongst </p>
			<p> The<em>description</em> our among selection a operating also and ‘friendship’, our and ‘friends’ our declaring (formally) By procedure. descriptive and declarative this with agreed also therefore having themselves network, own one’s in network the of members other includes formally one that requires networks social of technology relational the by demanded is as such friends’ of ‘network one’s of <em>sorts all of contacts and acquaintances, friends,</em> under alteration profound a trigger we ‘friends’, appellation the under together lumped all here ,<em>networks: social as understood be to used what</em> ones very the structures, social old pals, chums, acquaintances, relatives, and family friends, <em>creating</em> and networks those <em>depending</em>etc. time, same the at them on </p>
			<p> of sort the as rather them consider should we think I Therefore, friends. our call now we whom those to regard with altogether them abandon to even sometimes and them, change profoundly to time same the at and explicit, them make to us leads suddenly which technologies, relational these into drawn ourselves see we now But much. so it realizing really without but networks, social these in included already were we thus And<em>philia</em> book my in voiced already hypothesis an here repeating am I anthills. their in ants white or jackdaw the Tschock like animals, amongst see we <em> 1 Symbolique Misère la De</em> colony. the of members all by continuously emitted pheromones chemical the of sway the under around moving arthropods synchronized of level the to behavior humanity’s return well could traceability, generalize they as far so in technologies, digital that suggest I where</p>
			<p> a networks social, as known also digital, are meaning: full its take would Lauxerois by raised issue translation the that here is It<em>philia</em> elusive this achieve to opportunity novel a constitute they do or insects, of state the to us regressing <em>philotès</em> what about say to had Aristotle what at look us let further, even issue the dramatize to order in And humans? among <em>philia</em>human: is it when is </p>
			<p class="quote"><em>Philia</em>goods. other all of possession the in even it, without live to choose would nobody since life, in thing necessary most the is <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-12" id="footnote-294455-12-backlink">12</a></sup></p>
			<p> philia friendship, as manifestation its in and humans, among clear: crystal is Aristotle Here,<em>good precious most the is</em> for good precious most the is It .<em>individual</em> because beings, human <em>living worth not is life it, without</em>.<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-13" id="footnote-294455-13-backlink">13</a></sup> </p>
			<p> for good precious most the also is it But<em>societies</em>networks. social words, other in or threads, relational spawns that solidarity the create to power as means also which power, linking as feature, basic very their constitutes it that reason simple the for </p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> form that networks the and then, friends these – bench a on Pecuchet meeting Bouvard like encounter, the from arise that things unexpected the as just happy, so us makes encounter chance whose – friends These<em>around</em> and them <em>thanks</em> <em>to</em> to us from demand procedures entry Facebook the what precisely are them, <em>declare</em>also but established, be can relation any before ,<em>password a chosen and address email our given duly have we after only </em> a is it – station police the at statement a making from different way no in thus is It .<em>formalization</em> ,<em>publication a</em>public. making of sense the in ,</p>
			<p> is friendship whereby construct a Such<em> formalized, declared,</em>and<em>public made </em> sense certain a in one friend, one’s be to someone declares one if character: performative perfectly its on ones including – questions many many, invites <em>makes</em> and friend, a her or him <em>forces</em> to precisely is it relationship, friendship-based a to essential something is there if that seem would it Yet one. be to him or her <em>escape</em> called is what of group a of existence the to contribute to contrary the on but publicity, and formalization <em>intimi</em> of circle the speaking, broadly more or, with, intimate is one people ,<em>faces familiar</em>encounter. chance their after Pecuchet and Bouvard do promptly as address, informal the to polite the from instance for switching friendship, of bonds the establishing when says one something typically is us’ between fuss ‘No .<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-14" id="footnote-294455-14-backlink">14</a></sup></p>
			<p> the called Lacan what constituting relationships, of intimate most the to pertaining reach limited narrowly more a have even could declaration public the and small, very be could network social a Such network. social a of origin the at lies often very friendship because precisely declaration, explicit, an not if public, a them with carried always friendships Maybe show. to try will I as nature, in complex more still is situation the maybe However,<em>extime</em>(‘exteem’). <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-15" id="footnote-294455-15-backlink">15</a></sup></p>
			<p>25? August after users million hundred pass will and year this of beginning the since month a million ten of rate a at grown has that network social a mentioned, has Seban Alain as is, it that fact the from apart actually, Facebook is what considerations, these all besides Now,<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-16" id="footnote-294455-16-backlink">16</a></sup>features: two on based functioning of mode a has Facebook language: non-Aristotelian a in so say to and friends, among say to is that informally, says one as beginning, the with start to Well, </p>
			<ol>
				<li class="numbered-list"><span>1.</span> <em>profile a creating</em> of kind a to amounts which ,<em>relations one’s through self-description</em>,</li>
				<li class="numbered-list-last"><span>2.</span> <em>dialogue</em> process a constitutes which ,<em>individuation collective of terms in sociation of</em>.</li>
			</ol>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p>marketing. surgical that call let’s – possible way precise most the in ‘potentials’ target to advertisers by of use made being nowadays is it as insofar problematic is feature profiling the that fact the of aware is Everybody</p>
			<p> The<em>self</em> an be course of could function -profiling<em>reflexivity in exercise</em> in not if engage, thereby to and ethnographer, an were she or he if as belonging social her or his declare to network of type this of member new the bring to effect principal as has it but it, practicing person the for <em>auto-ethnography</em> an in least at then ,<em>auto-sociography</em> a through all – ones venal and trivial most the including kinds, all of interests also but friendships, concerning especially – attachments network her or his writing and declaring by <em>mechanism script digital</em> .</p>
			<p> major of be could feature self-indexation this that believe do I<em>significance social</em> a trigger even could and ,<em>renewal</em> a for make indeed would which individuation, technical and collective psychical, of process a of emergence the to others, and Facebook like networks intelligence collective and communities by work to put intelligently if lead, could otherwise) and (friendly relationships of declaration public the in included reflexivity the that believe do I much. that deny can’t we way, the by shape bad in is which – life social of <em>peaceful relationally</em>term. the of sense strict the in ‘friendly’ be not would it if even goodwill), (i.e. benevolence new a – say to dare I if – in grounded century, 21st benevolent or <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-17" id="footnote-294455-17-backlink">17</a></sup></p>
			<p> precisely shape good very in not is social the that say probably would Others<em>technologies these of be­-cause</em> they as time same the at it destroy which <em>formalize</em>etc.). friends’, no are there business ‘in that hears often one why reason the small, or big moves cunning no money, involving trucks no (meaning us’, between fuss ‘no the hence computations, such supersedes always friendship whereas – existence of destruction computation-imposed a to lead would which computations, of also but rules, of extraction the meta-formalizations, for allows indeed mechanism a Such be. may it So it. </p>
			<p> of theory Barnes’ John of mainstay the form research, anthropological or sociological of sake the for made are they when moves, considered cunning, These<em>networks social</em>.<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-18" id="footnote-294455-18-backlink">18</a></sup> which names – names their telling into girls little tribe’s the trick to incident an from arising opportunity the took he where tribe, Nambikwara the within relations social the formalize structurally and research to order in road same the down went Lévi-Strauss Claude <em>remained have to ought</em> <em>secret</em>:</p>
			<p class="quote">up. dried information of sources my and reprimanded were children the discovered, was this When too. names adult’s the me give to them got soon I accomplices, another’s one sense, a in all, were we and completed was this When names. their of all knew I time in till other, the against one on, children the egg to scrupulous, very not though enough, easy was it Thenceforward reprisal. of way by name, girl’s other the me tell to decided she on going was what out found enemy the when and name, enemy’s her me tell to trying was girl little first The incident. the of bottom the to get to able was I while little a After secret. another be to seemed what me tell to turn her in tried and rage, a in me to up came on, going was what out found adversary her Eventually again. over and over it repeat to her ask to had I understand not did I As ear. my in secret”, “great a something, whisper to began and protection for me to ran She comrades. her of one by struck was girl little a children, of group a with playing was I when day, One<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-19" id="footnote-294455-19-backlink">19</a></sup></p>
			<p>wish their against much very Indians, Hopi the of grammar the formalized who Whorf, Lee Benjamin of works the here mention also could one – relations social of establishment the in instrumental relationships hidden the exploring descriptions anthropological such from is It<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-20" id="footnote-294455-20-backlink">20</a></sup> a as social the of understanding better a at arrive may we that – <em>rules relational of set</em> the of exercise the of modalities the were, it as strengthen, to dense, more it make to able be even and ,<em>philia</em>.</p>
			<p>individuation. reflexive of form a to lead also could Facebook, like network social a is that auto-anthropology of system this through done if descriptions, of kind same the that believe to coming am I now And<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-21" id="footnote-294455-21-backlink">21</a></sup>conditions? what under so, if But </p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> through is It<em>science</em> reflexive of kind a at arrive should we that – rules social formalizes what is law since – law or linguistics, or anthropology it be ,<em>philia</em> of hallmark the as understood be could which ,<em>political</em> Greek the with arose societies Political societies. <em>polis</em> a as citizenship in grounded were they that sense the in rules of set strict a to according explicit made and described, declared, itself law, public in grounded was which ,<em>law public on based and declared formally was itself which bond, friendship constituted formally</em> called group social a into condition entry the simply was which <em>polis</em> then and ,<em>civitas</em>writing. namely explicit, relations makes that technology a in grounded also itself networks of network a is course, of This, nation. finally and ,</p>
			<p> must birth, called commonly community, the of member new a of arrival the nowadays, fact, In<em>always and absolutely</em> a formalizes time same the at who death), and birth (of registrar a to declaration a to lead <em>family</em>them. without historians no be would There life. her or his of time the for unfortunate, or happy circumstances in person, a accompany archives formal hence and written These writing. in down it putting by network </p>
			<p>culture. very their destroy would it knew they grammatized: be to language their want didn’t Hopis the why is This language. the share: humans all organ relational elementary most the with starts It relationships. formalizing for mnemotechnic a is Writing</p>
			<p>group? social a constitute which arise networks social which through flows of kind the – flows relational its of formalization discretized a is, that grammatization, of modality another offer to able been had anthropology if future better a had have Warburg, Aby fascinated so which society, Hopi wouldn’t yet, And</p>
			<p> of process particular a to leads turn in This individuation. collective to extension, progressive by leading citizens, other the of her, of him through and citizen, each of individuation psychical the of intensification an of service the in script written the of way by relationships social of grammatization descriptive the on grounded is forming citizenship that clear is it case, the is Whatever<em>trans-individuation</em> the to amounts simply which ,<em>history of writing</em> the to leading itself ,<em>dynamic social specific</em> Occident. the call we which </p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> a call I<em>trans-individuation of process</em>co-individuating socially individuations psychical of assemblage an words, Simondon’s in always, is that something relationship, social a of course the during that ensures which that <em> </em> dual of processes through this and sense), psychical the in only not (and other each<em>co-individuation</em>,<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-22" id="footnote-294455-22-backlink">22</a></sup> individuation meaning <em>time, a at people two by</em><sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-23" id="footnote-294455-23-backlink">23</a></sup> of process a much), so us fascinates friendship Meister’s Wilhelm why and important, so are friendships childhood why (reason individual psychical the of formation the for instances necessary and exquisite are love and friendship which of <em>meta-stabilization</em> an theory network neuronal in called be would what towards it leads which co-individuation, this during exists, <em>attractor</em> as up built gets relations of type certain a which through ,<em>norm</em> .</p>
			<p> that implies This<em>co-individuation simple not is trans-individuation</em> the become to bound is what is it :<em>rule</em>meanings. meta-stabilizes what is trans-individual the and trans-individual, the calls Simondon what in results trans-individuation a Such time. the of most unconscious is it as efficient more rule a network, the of </p>
			<p> who those by shared understanding an it giving by world a for make Meanings<em>themselves co-individuate and individuate</em> simple a was what transforming thereby evolve, meaning its making by it in <em>network</em> true a in <em>world</em>friendship. constituting bonds the of force the with is that friendship, of seal the under together them bonds and network-world, this form who those among triggered is individuation psychical and collective of process a which within ,</p>
			<p> of process a to shown, has Foucault Michel as lead, also can it bond, social the strengthening thereby and individuation psychical enhancing by individuation collective is that evolution the of intensification the for allows which regime individuation an constitutes script written the if So<em>subjectivation</em> a is actually which ,<em>sujétion</em> and de-subjectification to turn in leading submission, or ,<em>disindividuation</em>.</p>
			<p> also but behaviors, all ‘files’ only not power the where societies, disciplinary termed Foucault what of true particularly is This<em>documentalizes</em>(‘ bio-power called Foucault what is This writing. of way by control to aspects, its all in life, whole their submit to order in individuals <em>biopouvoir</em>’).</p>
			<p>them’, fix and capture that documents of mass whole a in them engages it writing; of network a in them situates also surveillance of field a in individuals places that examination The […] documentation of field the into individuality introduces also examination ‘The states, Foucault As technique. surveillance a and disciplinary a foremost is which – health-check or school-test – test the is bio-power the of Characteristic<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-24" id="footnote-294455-24-backlink">24</a></sup>writing’. of ‘power a also constitutes which and </p>
			<p>‘Edvige’-project the if even Now,<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-25" id="footnote-294455-25-backlink">25</a></sup>report Nora-Minc the in noted already something of us reminded <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-26" id="footnote-294455-26-backlink">26</a></sup> the liberties, collective and individual to risk considerable a represent – ‘telematics’ call to propose authors the what of expansion the – traceability ensuing the and digitization namely society, of informatization the on <em>issue new truly the issue, big</em> about much so not is ,<em>control police and state</em> which control the about but ,<em>marketing</em>anthill. digital a – slavery self-inflicted computer-assisted, of form new a to lead will inevitably they that fear might one pessimism, to inclined If relations. social of self-description of systems of set-up the through behaviors on exercise to attempts </p>
			<p>precise, more even be to or psycho-power, a bio-power: a than greater something face will we case which In<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-27" id="footnote-294455-27-backlink">27</a></sup>psycho-socio-power. a <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-28" id="footnote-294455-28-backlink">28</a></sup></p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p>such. as marketing or police demonize to out I am Neither instruments. marketing simple to nor instruments, police to networks social reduce simply to out not am I that clarify immediately must I</p>
			<p> that show to like would rather I<em>grammati of process a within stage a represent networks social</em>z<em>ation</em> the to leads which ,<em> relations social of grammatization</em>difference. a again, then meaning individuation, an also meaning difference, a produce to able is iteration, its of way by which, and iterated, be can what of critique, or reflexivity, a finally, and control, or computing of operations, other, the on and discretized, is what of reproduction the hand, one on permits, which discretization and formalization of process the grammatization call I such. as<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-29" id="footnote-294455-29-backlink">29</a></sup></p>
			<p> a are networks social grammatizations, all like relations, social of grammatization a being Now,<em>pharmacologic</em>individuation. of intensification the for as well as disindividuation for both allow they because phenomenon <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-30" id="footnote-294455-30-backlink">30</a></sup>lacking. entirely is present, at know I as far as that, something it, on installed were applications trans-individuation only if – helpful be should Facebook on function dialogue the where is This </p>
			<p> an about speculated sometimes Deleuze that forget not us let But forward. further them push they and – societies modulation and control called Deleuze what of components essential therefore are networks Social<em>control the of art</em> but control, with away do to not was concern primary his that and ,<em>something do to</em> which disindividuation possible a represents marketing, by exercised control behavioral the through but control, police through much so not worse, disindividuation make networks social that fact The it. of control take to not if – it with <em>could</em> to able is one if only but countered, be <em>networks social of direction pharmacologic the reverse</em>.</p>
			<p> networks, social of future the inventing about foremost is It represent. they dangers the ignoring or networks, social of existence the denying or preventing about not is this All<em>in</em> and networks, social <em>with</em> are which networks these of understanding an at arrive to able are we if possible only is this But networks. social <em>time same the at</em> becoming of capable networks these make to as understanding an such attain to and social, and technological <em>reflexivity of agents</em>catastrophe. Chernobyl the after ago, years twenty than more invoked Beck Ulrich modernity reflexive the of agents as instance for – </p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> word the used just I<em>catastrophe</em> about think to formula, open more a use to or, modernity’, ‘reflexive this regarding mediations other about think to us inviting all catastrophes, more many discover now we Fukushima), at catastrophe the witnessed have also we meanwhile the in (and catastrophe great a was Chernobyl if that here posit to like would I further, any proceeding before and same, the All vain. in used be not should yet days, these commonplace become has that word a ,<em>civilization industrial new a</em> of state present seemingly our of out us drag would which something ,<em>decadence industrial</em>.</p>
			<p> the before existed which networks social the of erosion undeniable, but slow, the to due from more and more suffer people young something generations, between those also and social, psychical, are that catastrophes about specifically more thinking am I Here,<em>networks social digital</em> etc. organizations, mediating citizenship, neighbors, school, family, the like ,</p>
			<p> the short-cuts which network, television the is think, I culprit, worst The networks. of kinds all multiply which psycho-technologies by buttressed psycho-power of influence excessive the of consequence the as comes erosion This<em>network social traditional</em> a of care took millennia for nature, inter-generational its of virtue by which, one the ,<em>reticularity familiar</em> that ,<em>philia</em> disindividuation. collective time same the at and psychical of kind a to led has which and exist, can society no which without </p>
			<p> these beyond Thus,<em>psycho-technologies</em> ,<em>socio-technologies</em>attention. psychical of capturing massive of technology a with also and bonds, inter-generational of destruction a with together goes disindividuation this times, complex very our in how, elsewhere shown have I networks. social with together appear psycho-socio-technologies rather, or ,<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-31" id="footnote-294455-31-backlink">31</a></sup> </p>
			<p> from derived is name whose politeness common the urbanity, civility, means attention Social thing. social a also but psychical, a only not is attention knows, one as Yet,<em>polis</em>war. is foes amongst relationship common the that and foe, a is friend a of opposite the that true is it far so For possible. garb peaceful and friendly most its in politics is that ,</p>
			<p>technologies. relational of form the in attention, social of as well as psychical of capture the and formation of techniques work to putting regarding achieve should we mutation the is – processes trans-individuation of formalization the of facets other innumerable and technologies metadata with together goes course of which – social the of grammatization digital the constituting networks social of gambit The</p>
			<p>individuation. of forms new of invention the towards road only and one the also is grammatization, its of virtue very the by what, is social, the of destruction the of is that disindividuation, of processes creates what precisely that is, general in issues these on thesis fundamental My<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-32" id="footnote-294455-32-backlink">32</a></sup>(IRI). Innovation and Research for Institute Pompidou’s Centre at development and research and activities the all informs that viewpoint the is this And </p>
			<p> the call I that emerging presently phenomenon a within this and peace, or war dilemma: the than less no to amounts exercise an such of gambit the that stressing by conclusion a as sketch to attempt shall I what is that and – objects its of critique pharmacological a operating first by achievable only is position a such However,<em>inter-nation</em>.<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-33" id="footnote-294455-33-backlink">33</a></sup></p>
			<p class="separation-dash">—</p>
			<p> relationships. ancestral inter-generational, in grounded networks – networks social called be to used what liquidated has which disindividuation social a from suffers then society contemporary collectively, individuating by individuate psychically only can one which following theory, Simondon’s of example extraordinary an are networks social If</p>
			<p> networks, non-social of – games networked including mediations, of modes socio-technological other many so and Facebook through – emergence the observe can we think to tempted is one prism, this through Looking<em>substitutes</em> for <em>true</em> networks: social <em>pharmaka</em> workshop the in Gaon Thomas by demonstrated well was as – live adults young which in desert social the for relief a are games as just relations, social of lack the for ‘cure’ a are They reality. social of absence the for make-dos and make-believes simulacra, ersatz, networks, social of <em>Technology and Desire</em>IRI. at Girard Mathilde by organized <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-34" id="footnote-294455-34-backlink">34</a></sup> maybe – disease the than worse be well might themselves administer adults young these cure the that think to tempted then is One <em>further no enquires one if is, that erroneously,</em>.</p>
			<p> a namely, dearly: so miss they what reconstitute to way a technologies these in find who and networks, social the develop who adults young the is it Yes,<em>philia</em>‘peer-to-peer’ why is This provide. networks these what exactly is that and – peer a of adult, young another of gaze the needs adult young a But .<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-35" id="footnote-294455-35-backlink">35</a></sup> ideal an is internet the and flight, a such taken has <em>medium</em> to want They thing. good a is that and practice, to and act to want they consumers, mere be to wish longer no youths nowadays because itself imposed also has peer-to-peer IRI, at us for But relationships. parity-based such develop to <em>individuate</em>collectively. and psychically both ,<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-36" id="footnote-294455-36-backlink">36</a></sup></p>
			<p>‘ the called Freud what of construction of space a also is network social a that fact the of notice take should also we that context generous) (and general this within is It<em>identification of processes secondary</em> the within i.e. network, social proximity-based a within place take normally which ’,<em>philia</em>etc. political, also are which type, urban or rural, or clannish, or tribal, or familial, the of device a constituting </p>
			<p> present the as far as And<em>domain public</em> as consider actually they who adults, of ground stamping the eyes, their in become, have These networks. television the from loose break to adults young numerous allows it that notice good take us let – meanwhile the in apart fallen have structures previous all that given networks, psycho-socio-technological of consists and digitized large and by now is which – concerned is <em>minors</em> become not than often more have parents their since ,<em>infantilized</em>brain-time’, ‘disposable of repository a in psyche their of transformation the by <sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-37" id="footnote-294455-37-backlink">37</a></sup> truly not if relational, own its developing by counter to wants youth contemporary situation a <em>social</em>space. ,</p>
			<p> social a that believe not do I Because proviso? this Why<em>network</em> the about is issue real the that believe I because also And group. social a of formation the foster to itself, by able, be ever could particular in network socio-technological a and general, in <em>arrangement</em> social of <em>networks</em> social with <em>groups</em>mafia). a to equivalent is group social a without network social a (since </p>
			<p> to order in But individuation. of space a hence and space scripted a also is network socio-technological a because believable entirely also but possible, only not is arrangement an Such<em>actually</em> precisely: more it put to or, inter-generational, be also should network socio-technological a possible, be <em>networks socio-psycho-technological of arrangement inter-generational an as itself constitute should group social a</em>.<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-38" id="footnote-294455-38-backlink">38</a></sup></p>
			<p>ones. socio-technological to connecting been have too networks immigration way the networks, social traditional of forms all time, its in in, take to bound is networks social by represented grammatization The between. in experience life of forms and types other innumerable and beliefs, religious to activities professional from ranging – interest of foci various pursuing of purpose the for adults by invested been have networks these of Many them. of instance one only is Facebook and networks, socio-technological of kinds all are There</p>
			<p>( majority and maturity of production the for networks become should They networks. socio-technological of development the of matters in responsibilities our way, generous must also but attentive, most the in up take must adults, as we, that entails this us, for and culture, modern to respect with stance political very a take Pompidou, Centre the of Institute Innovation and Research the at We,<em>majorité</em>infantilized. dramatically so become have themselves adults where age an in difficult extremely become has that thing a process, the in adults into minors from transforming adulthood, towards path their find to enabled are adults young where networks networks, adult word: the of sense Kantian the in )</p>
			<p>networks. social the in friends of communities politicized meaning policed, create to need we that, For<sup><a class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-294455-39" id="footnote-294455-39-backlink">39</a></sup>co to order in networks the on go to feasible perfectly be should it instance, for where, network, the of conception pharmacological a to according conducted be should project This individuation. their of conditions the regarding stance critical a take they that sense the in civic be should communities These <a id="Anker"/> needed much a invent to this, for and critique, of spaces establish to networks, the in and on knowledge practical and theoretical of communities develop to necessary is It individuation. collective and technological, psychical, of process a as concretization their of way the in stands that networks same very these on anything unter<em>technology political</em> of understanding advanced an turn its in requires which ,<em>metadataware</em>contribution. voluntary on based and well-meaning, peaceful, time same the at are that controversies logical organizing by and technologies, trans-individuation polemical on based ,</p>
			<p class="text-last"> IRI. the at on working are we what is This</p>
			<h6 class="references_title"> References</h6>
			<p class="references"> Alain. Badiou,<em>l’amour De</em>1999. Flammarion, Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Michel. Foucault,<em>Prison the of Birth The Punish: and Discipline</em>1977. Books, Vintage York: New Sheridan, Alan trans. ,</p>
			<p class="references"> (eds). Miller Jacques-Alain and Jacques Lacan,<em>l’Autre à autre D’un XVI: Séminaire Le</em> 2006. Seuil, du Éd. Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references">de IX et VIII Chapitres L’Amicalité, Aristote, in Aristote’, à ‘Postface Jean. Lauxerois,<em>Nicomaque à Ethique </em>2002. propos, À Éditions : Garches Lauxerois, Jean trans. ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Claude. Lévi-Strauss,<em>Tropiques Tristes</em>1961. Books, Criterion York: New Russell, John trans. ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Minc. Alain and Simon Nora,<em>société la de L’Informatisation</em>1997. Seuil, du Éd. Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Bontems. Vincent and Philippe Petit,<em>psychopouvoir et l’hypermateriel de Economie</em> 2008. nuits, une et Mille Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Bernard. Stiegler,<em>générations des et jeunesse la De soin. Prendre</em>2008. Flammarion, Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references"> ______.<em>pharmacologie la De vécue. d’être peine la vaut vie la que fait qui Ce</em>2010. Flammarion, Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references"> (ed.) ______<em>sociaux réseaux des ingénierie et politique Culture sociaux: Réseaux</em>2012. éditions, FYP Limoges: Industriel, Monde Nouveau du Collection ,</p>
			<p class="references"> ______.<em>l’université de Pharmacologie siècle. XIXème au savoir et Bêtise</em>2012. Fayard, Paris: ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Jacob. Uexküll, von<em>Meaning of Theory a With Humans: and Animals of Worlds the Into Foray A</em>2010. Press, Minnesota of University Minneapolis: O’Neill, D. Joseph trans. ,</p>
			<p class="references"> Gilbert. Simondon,<em>physico-biologique genèse sa et L’individu</em> 1997. France, de Universitaires Paris Paris: Million, Jérôme edition, second ,</p>
			<p class="references-last"> Lee. Benjamin Whorf,<em>Anthropologie et Linguistique</em>1956. Denoël, Gonthier Paris: ,</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h6 class="references_title">Notes</h6>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-1-backlink" id="footnote-294455-1">1</a> (ed.) Stiegler Bernard in published Originally Riemens. Patrice by French the from .	Translated<em>sociaux réseaux des ingénierie et politique Culture sociaux: Réseaux</em>2012. éditions, FYP Limoges: Industriel, Monde Nouveau du Collection ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-2-backlink" id="footnote-294455-2">2</a> Stiegler, Bernard see, argument and analysis further .	For<em>ami? mon devenir Veux-tu</em>(‘ <em>friend? my become to want you Do</em>forthcoming. ’),</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-3-backlink" id="footnote-294455-3">3</a>( philotès et Philia 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/a">http://iri.tw/a</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-4-backlink" id="footnote-294455-4">4</a>de IX et VIII Chapitres L’Amicalité, Aristote, in Aristote’, à ‘Postface Lauxerois, .	Jean<em>Nicomaque à Ethique </em>84. p. 2002, propos, À Éditions Garches: Lauxerois, Jean trans. ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-5-backlink" id="footnote-294455-5">5</a> Uexküll, von .	Jacob<em>Meaning of Theory a With Humans: and Animals of Worlds the Into Foray A</em>111. p. 2010, Press, Minnesota of University Minneapolis: O’Neill, D. Joseph trans. ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-6-backlink" id="footnote-294455-6">6</a>84. p. Aristote’, à ‘Postface Lauxerois, .	Jean</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-7-backlink" id="footnote-294455-7">7</a> Simondon, .	Gilbert<em>physico-biologique genèse sa et L’individu</em>translated). (quote 156 p. 1997, France, de Universitaires Paris Paris: Million, Jérôme edition, second ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-8-backlink" id="footnote-294455-8">8</a> Simondon, .	Gilbert<em>physico-biologique genèse sa et L’individu</em>translated). (quote 1 note ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-9-backlink" id="footnote-294455-9">9</a> Simondon, .	Gilbert<em>physico-biologique genèse sa et L’individu</em>translated). (quote 157 p. ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-10-backlink" id="footnote-294455-10">10</a>translator.) from (Note original. French the in used .	English</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-11-backlink" id="footnote-294455-11">11</a>( évolution ou Régression 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/8">http://iri.tw/8</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-12-backlink" id="footnote-294455-12">12</a> Aristotle’s in passage famous the from .	Paraphrased<em>1 Chapter VIII, Book Ethics, Nicomachean</em>translator). from (Note .</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-13-backlink" id="footnote-294455-13">13</a> of form other the presupposes it .	And<em>philia</em> Stiegler, Bernard See, love. filial and maternal friendship: antedates which <em>pharmacologie la De vécue. d’être peine la vaut vie la que fait qui Ce</em>( 2010 Flammarion, Paris: ,<em>pharmacology On living: worth life makes What</em>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-14-backlink" id="footnote-294455-14">14</a>( déclarée, l’amitié ou Facebook 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/6">http://iri.tw/6</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-15-backlink" id="footnote-294455-15">15</a> (eds) Miller Jacques-Alain and Lacan .	Jacques<em>l’Autre à autre D’un XVI: Séminaire Le</em> 2006. Seuil, du Éd. Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-16-backlink" id="footnote-294455-16">16</a>users). registered billion one hit time mean the in has Facebook translator: from (Note members. million 700 over has now Facebook 2008. in made were remarks .	These</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-17-backlink" id="footnote-294455-17">17</a>( paisible siècle XXIe d’un Emergence 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/7">http://iri.tw/7</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-18-backlink" id="footnote-294455-18">18</a>text). French original the in English translator: from (Note networks’. ‘social for entry Wikipedia (French) the .	See</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-19-backlink" id="footnote-294455-19">19</a> Lévi-Strauss, .	Claude<em>Tropiques Tristes</em>270. p. 1961, Books, Criterion York: New Russell, John trans. ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-20-backlink" id="footnote-294455-20">20</a> Whorf, Lee .	Benjamin<em>anthropologie et Linguistique</em>1956. Denoël, Gonthier Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-21-backlink" id="footnote-294455-21">21</a>( réflexive Individuation 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/b">http://iri.tw/b</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-22-backlink" id="footnote-294455-22">22</a> Badiou, Alain see, dual’ ‘the .	On<em>l’amour De</em>1999. Flammarion, Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-23-backlink" id="footnote-294455-23">23</a>( Transindividuation 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/g">http://iri.tw</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-24-backlink" id="footnote-294455-24">24</a> Foucault, .	Michel<em>Prison the of Birth The Punish: and Discipline</em>189. p. 1977, Books, Vintage York: New Sheridan, Alan trans. ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-25-backlink" id="footnote-294455-25">25</a>translator). from (Note protests. massive of wake the in abandoned finally project, registry police French comprehensive .	A</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-26-backlink" id="footnote-294455-26">26</a> Minc, Alain and Nora .	Simon<em>société la de L’Informatisation</em>1997. Seuil, du Éd. Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-27-backlink" id="footnote-294455-27">27</a> Bontems, Vincent and Petit Philippe with conversation in Stiegler Bernard .	See<em>psychopouvoir et l’hypermateriel de Economie</em> 2008. nuits, une et Mille Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-28-backlink" id="footnote-294455-28">28</a>( Marketing du main en prise de risque Le 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/d">http://iri.tw/d</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-29-backlink" id="footnote-294455-29">29</a> Stiegler, Bernard see issues, these .	On<em>l’université de Pharmacologie siècle. XIXème au savoir et Bêtise</em>2012. Fayard, Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-30-backlink" id="footnote-294455-30">30</a>( remède ou poison sociaux, Réseaux 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/9">http://iri.tw/9</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-31-backlink" id="footnote-294455-31">31</a> Stiegler, .	Bernard<em>générations des et jeunesse la De soin. Prendre</em>generations’). and youth On care. (‘Taking 2008. Flammarion, Paris: ,</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-32-backlink" id="footnote-294455-32">32</a>( d’individuation forme nouvelle une Vers 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/e">http://iri.tw</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-33-backlink" id="footnote-294455-33">33</a> Stiegler, Bernard see, inter-nation of concept the .	For<em> siècle. XIXème au savoir et Bêtise</em></p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-34-backlink" id="footnote-294455-34">34</a>2008. June 26 Girard, Mathilde by responsabilité la sous recherche de l’Institut the for organized Tisseron, Serge and Gaon Thomas with workshop videos’, jeux des Autour technologies: et .	‘Désir</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-35-backlink" id="footnote-294455-35">35</a>translator). from (Note original. the in .	English</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-36-backlink" id="footnote-294455-36">36</a>( acteurs Adolescents 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/h">http://iri.tw/h</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-37-backlink" id="footnote-294455-37">37</a>translator). from (Note audience. channel’s the at looking was he how express to director broadcasting commercial a by statement .	(In)famous</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-38-backlink" id="footnote-294455-38">38</a>( social groupe au social réseau Du 2008, ENMI engineering’, social du l’époque à sociale relation et ‘Désir Stiegler, Bernard by held lecture the .	See<a href="http://iri.tw/f">http://iri.tw/f</a>).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-294455-39" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-294455-39-backlink">39</a>.&#9;See the lecture held by Bernard Stiegler, ‘Désir et relation sociale à l’époque du social engineering’, ENMI 2008, Communautés critiques (<a href="http://iri.tw/e">http://iri.tw/e</a>).</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
