<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>unlike-us-reader-26</title>
		<link href="css/unlike-us-reader.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="unlike-us-reader" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<h1 id="toc_marker-25" class="article-title"><a id="The-Tactics-of-Occupation---Becoming-Cockroach" />The Tactics of Occupation: Becoming Cockroach</h1>
			<p class="slash">/</p>
			<h2 class="author-name"><a href="unlike-us-reader-34.xhtml#hatzopoulos">84319</a> and <a href="unlike-us-reader-34.xhtml#kambouri">18533</a></h2>
		</div>
		<div>
			<p>We begin with a snapshot: June 29, 2011, a day of protest in Syntagma square against the emergency austerity measures that were about to be voted on by the Greek parliament.</p>
			<p class="quote"><em>Since yesterday, June 28, we live like cockroaches in Syntagma square. We are sprayed continuously with chemicals by the Greek police regardless of what we do or what we say, but we persist. We leave Syntagma square for a while to catch our breath and keep on coming back. We rest a bit and return to the square. Even before the chemicals began exploding yesterday morning, we were just sitting on the pavement and the riot police stormed and arrested a person sitting nearby. When we protested against the arrest, the riot police responded by arresting another passerby who was just exiting a coffee shop with a coffee in his hand. To be just standing close to Syntagma square seems dangerous and certainly suspicious. The arrests are being enacted to disperse the crowds, but we keep on moving closer to the square instead of leaving.</em><em></em></p>
			<p class="quote"><em>As we are becoming cockroaches we begin, without really realizing it, to adopt tactics of stasis, of perseverance and endurance that were previously unknown to us. Chemicals keep on flying, sound bombs keep on exploding all around us making terrible noise and the crowds respond by not leaving, by remaining at Syntagma square. Becoming cockroaches and growing more and more resistant to the chemicals, our bodies begin to mutate. In gas masks, painting Maalox on our faces, wearing sunglasses and ski masks, we persist. The figures in gas masks and Maalox recognize each other even when they meet further away from Syntagma square.</em><em></em></p>
			<p class="quote"><em>Even now that the austerity law was approved in the Greek parliament, the crowds are not leaving, they are reinforced. “Let’s have an assembly now”, said someone in the midst of a cloud of chemicals. Like we did when we “staged the music concert yesterday”, he explains. Yesterday, we were cleaning and washing the square with water for hours to disperse the smell of the chemicals and then from a defunct PA system the Tiger Lillies played live on Syntagma square. Chemicals and sound bombs started to explode again all around Syntagma, but everybody remained on the square and kept on dancing.</em><em></em></p>
			<p class="quote"><em>The classic urban tactics of demonstration (marching in a linear fashion, protesting in front of the Parliament, dispersing after the end of the demonstration) or confrontation (like throwing marbles, stones, and Molotov cocktails against the police and destroying symbolic targets like banks, multinational commercial chains etc.) seem and are secondary in face of our tactics. Cockroaches do not attack, they do not make much noise, nor do they destroy something. But we cockroaches are far more persistent and productive than other animals that are slowly disappearing.</em></p>
			<p>When we wrote this passage we were not simply thinking of a denunciation of police violence and repression, neither did we try to call for solidarity in support of humans ‘treated like animals’. At the time, Syntagma square (the central square of Athens located outside the Parliament building) was already occupied for several weeks by protestors: indignados, left-wing and anarchist activists, as well as nationalist groups who camped and organized open discussions and mobilizations against the government austerity measures. </p>
			<p>The occupy Syntagma movement was only an instance – perhaps the most celebrated in the Greek context – in a long series of occupations that started to proliferate like an epidemic since the revolt of December 2008.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-1-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-1">1</a></sup> Local assemblies and occupations have multiplied and diversified our experiences of ‘becoming’ with others ever since. The state response against the occupation epidemic is to attempt to enforce a politics of hygiene. As the economic and social crisis deepens, the Greek state reverts to less economic forms of power: symbolic and direct physical violence tend to replace policies of control.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-2-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-2">2</a></sup> The state increasingly tends to represent protests against its policies as a hygiene problem. Political mobilizations are associated with efforts to make urban spaces filthy, radical protest groups are named ‘the unwashed’, antiracist initiatives are accused of impeding the state from ‘de-filthing’ Greek cities from the presence of destitute migrants. Occupied spaces are constantly attacked by police forces and are (in most cases temporarily) closed down. The police usually barricades occupied spaces with steel doors or cement walls in order to avoid further contamination. Supplementary hygienic policies are also devised: the Greek Ministry for the Protection of Citizen announced in 2012 (although it is yet to be seen whether this measure is going to be implemented) that instead of chemicals, water cannons are going to be used for dispersing protests. </p>
			<p>What we tried to convey with the opening passage was a bodily experience of becoming with others in the midst of these conditions. As we tried to defend the occupied space against the violent attacks by the police, we were able to act in common (although not always in a synchronized and well-rehearsed manner) despite our very different and often radically opposed standpoints. Wearing gas masks, painting our faces with Maalox to withstand the tear gas and other chemicals or adopting tactics of perseverance and endurance did not mean that we ‘humans’ were forced at this instance to mimic or pretend to be like an ‘inferior’ species, nor were we suddenly reduced to acting like insects. At these moments, rather, our bodies began to mutate in a process of living in common, which required different tactics of resistance – tactics that defy the limits between the human, the animal and the machinic.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-3-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-3">3</a></sup> Our bodies were not accustomed to these types of tactics no matter how long some may have participated in past militant mobilizations. This becoming required a de-skilling and a re-learning in common.</p>
			<p>In a similar fashion, in Tahrir square, after six successive days of murderous suffocation by teargas and other chemicals and of shootings of protestors with rubber bullets and live ammunition by the Egyptian security forces (from 19 to 24 of November 2011), Twitter user @El_Deeb wrote: ‘#Tahrir has turned into a lifestyle, a way of living, a utopian city’.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-4-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-4">4</a></sup> The repeated refusal of the protestors in Tahrir to leave the square, their perseverance in the face of what was previously thought of as ‘unlivable conditions’, effected the transformation of occupied space. </p>
			<p>Becoming cockroach is a process through which new possibilities are emerging for the propagation and expansion of the occupy movement beyond the confines of a particular urban public space.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-5-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-5">5</a></sup> </p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">The Production of Occupied Spaces </h3>
			<p>What connects the occupy movements across different locales is not a mutually shared opposition to the capitalist crisis, nor a collective identity (of the ‘indignados’ or of the 99%), nor a consensual political project (for real, authentic, or direct democracy). The multiplicity of occupations in different settings is primarily interrelated by the common desire to occupy space in order to remodify and remodel it. The call to ‘occupy’ is directly associated with the potentiality of the cooperative production of space through the very act of occupation. </p>
			<p>The global occupy movement uses a tactics of stasis: a primary refusal to move, instead of marching. From Tahrir, to Piazza del Sol, to Syntagma, to Zucchotti Park, immobility embodies the desire of the protestors to dissociate their occupied public spaces from existing networks of power. These tactics of stasis are not directly disruptive. They do not intend to block traffic or to close down the roads: to disrupt, in other words, the main networks of urban mobility. They are, instead, devised as a cause for themselves. Stasis operates through contagion and absorption: it constitutes the desire to absorb the entire everyday urban life into the occupy mode itself.</p>
			<p>This is how stasis relates to the existing organization of urban space-time. In a way, the occupiers adopt a politics of asymmetry in relation to power. Their tactics are not intended to destroy, head-on, the way that power organizes the space-time of urban life, nor to attack it in some of its weakest chains (although this is also done by certain groups that are part of these protests). Occupied public spaces are intended to devour, within their bordering, all of the existing activities and subjectivities that operate in the non-occupied city space.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-6-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-6">6</a></sup> The call to ‘occupy everything’ does not, then, directly aim at the destruction of existing structures of domination, but at the production of occupied zones within which multiple and often contradictory desires are possible and may co-exist. </p>
			<p>In occupied zones, we tend to become cyborgs. The possibilities of meeting, communicating, acting in common, and resisting repression depend on our ability to extend our bodies by means of machinic prostheses.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-7-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-7">7</a></sup> We use technologies to resist the effects of chemicals, to find places to hide, to trace the movements of the police, to help other protestors and connect with them. The bodies of more experienced militant protestors have clearly mutated and do not seem to be affected by the chemicals: they navigate their way easily across demarcating lines covering their noses and mouths with pieces of clothing. This allows them to enter into direct confrontation with the police forces. Most protestors, however, depend on their machinic prostheses: their gas masks that help them to breathe and their mobile phones that allow them to use Twitter or text messages in order to organize their mobilities, protect themselves and find a safe way back to the occupied space. The machinic prostheses of occupying bodies may not always be sophisticated but they enable a multiplication of bodily affects. </p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Machinic Cockroaches</h3>
			<p>The entanglement of social media activism with the global occupy movement creates the conditions for a becoming machinic cockroach. In 2007, an experiment was performed by a group of scientists at the Free University of Brussels. Scientists, there, created a set of tiny machinic cockroaches with the purpose of having them socialize with real cockroaches and of ultimately affecting their behavior.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-8-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-8">8</a></sup> The machinic cockroaches were basically tiny robots, of about the same size as real cockroaches and programmed to exude the same smell so that they would fool the real ones into believing that they were real, too.</p>
			<p>The experiment tried to test the predominant hypothesis that cockroaches find shelter on the basis of two criteria: a) how dark it is – choosing the darkest place available and b) how many other cockroaches are to be found in that spot. The researchers programmed the machinic cockroaches to prefer a less-dark hiding place than the ones available. During the experiment all the cockroaches scurried around randomly for a while, but the robots eventually settled under the lighter, less shadowy spot – and the real cockroaches followed. The machinic cockroaches had tricked the real ones into following them – even to places where a sensible roach would never venture. In a similar fashion, the occupy movements are using tactics of becoming machinic cockroaches for organizing their activities in social media platforms. </p>
			<p>Take the story of the ‘We are all Khaled Said’ Facebook page, for instance. In a recent interview, the administrators of this Facebook page, which played a prominent role in the initial mobilizations in Egypt, remembered how ‘in early November 2010, the page disappeared through an organized attack from the state security electronic department’. Their agents flooded Facebook with complaints that the Khaled Said page ‘violated Facebook’s terms and conditions’. The administrators of the page recounted how ‘activists in Egypt instantly campaigned Facebook through mass e-mails and threats to boycott Facebook’ and how they ‘immediately made calls to the Facebook headquarters in California’ demanding that the page be put back online. The page was up again in a few hours.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-9-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-9">9</a></sup></p>
			<p>Or take the story of Amira Yahyaoui, a cyber activist from Tunisia living in exile in France. The desire to prevent her blog from being blocked in Tunisia (internet censorship was heavy there from the beginning of the revolts) prompted her to basically change the URL of her blog on an almost daily basis. From ‘delle3a’ it became ‘delle3b’ and then ‘delle4a’, and so on, with Amira giving a tip in code the previous night of what the new URL would be.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-10-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-10">10</a></sup></p>
			<p>In these examples, social media activism adopted strategies of becoming machinic cockroach, not only in the sense of perseverance and mutation that made it possible for activists and their digital prostheses to remain visible online, refusing to vanish under the power of censorship and control, but also and most importantly for this argument, took on tactics of contagion and absorption. It enacted the ‘contamination’ of social media platforms with data flows and activity that ensured the peopling of social media. Having ‘#tahrir’ or ‘#ows’, or ‘#tunisie’ as Twitter world trending topics, or preventing a particular page or group or profile from being taken down by Facebook or from getting trolled by organized user groups, can be seen as an attempt to absorb digital flows at the borderline that an occupied zone is.</p>
			<p>In effect, like a machinic cockroach can disturb the dark habits of a band of cockroaches, these practices disturb the personalized, a-political, banal social interactions that normalize Facebook and Twitter usages. This is not to say, that the dominant social media platforms do not try to resist machinic cockroaches or that they do not attempt to appropriate them. The argument, instead, is that there is a radically new social media activism that is emerging via the global occupy movement. Radically different from previous practices of clicktivism, of enhancing and facilitating mobilizations, and of collectively articulating political demands, this new activism operates by attempting to transform social media platforms into occupy zones. Through becoming machinic cockroach, Facebook and Twitter users and data flows subvert the original usage of these media, destroy their common sense functioning and reclaim them as a plane where occupation is propagated, where the contagion of occupy zones proliferates.</p>
			<p>The reaction of social media monopolies to redefine and normalize these practices is ever present, but machinic cockroaches tend to reappropriate social media as planes of renewed struggle and of a continuous renegotiation of their potential usages.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">‘From the Arab Spring, to the European Summer, to the American Winter To…’</h3>
			<p>The global occupy protest movement is proliferating by ‘contagion, epidemics, battlefields, and catastrophes’.<sup><a id="footnote-309288-11-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-309288-11">11</a></sup> The occupy movement is not developing in a genealogical, linear fashion, evolving from past forms of mobilization and protest, but it rather emerges directly out of the exceptional material circumstances of crisis contagion and catastrophe that spread like an epidemic in different locales. The occupy movement is not linear, synchronic, nor evolutionary. Its failure to produce a new permanent structure for real democracy or for organizing future mobilizations or a new ‘species’ of revolutionary subjects is also its strength. The occupy protest movement is, strictly speaking, not a movement at all, but a block of strange and unfamiliar becomings that take place simultaneously in different on and offline locales.</p>
			<p class="text-last">Becoming cockroach embodies an ephemeral symbiosis of different life forms (natural and machinic) that are normally incompatible and even hostile. It is an ephemeral borderline phenomenon triggered by the political and socioeconomic crisis and by state and police violence in specific conditions. Becoming cockroach is, however, just one block of becomings that takes hold of different life forms. It is of crucial importance to resist the evolutionary analysis of these becomings that inevitably lead us to questions about the origins and the direction of protests: ‘where did they come from?’ and ‘what is born out of them?’ Occupy movements spread like contagion from one urban context to the next, from one social medium to another. They are always to be found in the ‘middle of a line’ that does not necessarily lead to a new power configuration, a new species or a new medium, but rather to a new set of becomings.</p>
			<h6 class="references_title">References</h6>
			<p class="references">Dalakoglou, Dimitris and Antonis Vradis (eds). <em>Revolt and Crisis in Greece: Between a Present Yet to Pass and a Future Still to Come</em>, Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2011.</p>
			<p class="references">Deleuze, Gilles. ‘Post-scriptum sur les sociétés contrôle’, in Gilles Deleuze, <em>Pourparlers</em>, Paris: Les Editions de Minuit, 1990, pp. 240-47.</p>
			<p class="references">Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari. <em>A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia</em>, London: Athlone Press, 1988.</p>
			<p class="references">Emon, Anver M., Ellen Lust and Audrey Macklin. ‘We Are All Khaled Said: An Interview with the Administrators of the Facebook Page that Fuelled the Egyptian Revolution’, <em>Boston Review</em>, 3 November 2011, <a href="http://www.bostonreview.net/BR36.6/khaled_said_facebook_egypt_revolution.php">http://www.bostonreview.net/BR36.6/khaled_said_facebook_egypt_revolution.php</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Haraway, Donna. ‘A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century’, in Donna Haraway, <em>Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature</em>, New York: Routledge, 1991, pp. 149-81.</p>
			<p class="references">Lemonick, Michael D. ‘Robotic Roaches Do the Trick’, <em>Time</em>, 15 November 2007, <a href="http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0.8599.1684427.00.html?imw=Y">http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0.8599.1684427.00.html?imw=Y</a>.</p>
			<p class="references-last">Yahyaoui, Amira. Interview with authors, 25 September 2011.</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h6 class="references_title">Notes</h6>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-1" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-1-backlink">1</a>.&#9;On the December 2008 revolts, see Dimitris Dalakoglou and Antonis Vradis (eds) <em>Revolt and Crisis in Greece: Between a Present Yet to Pass and a Future Still to Come</em>, Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2011.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-2" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-2-backlink">2</a>.&#9;For the transition from disciplinary societies to societies of control see, Gilles Deleuze, ‘Post-scriptum sur les sociétés de contrôle’, in Gilles Deleuze, <em>Pourparlers</em>, Paris: Les Editions de Minuit, 1990, pp. 240-47.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-3" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-3-backlink">3</a>.&#9;Donna Haraway, ‘A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century’, in Donna Haraway, <em>Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature</em>, New York: Routledge, 1991, pp. 149-81.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-4" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-4-backlink">4</a>.&#9;@El_Deeb, ‘#Tahrir has turned into a lifestyle, a way of living, a utopian city’, Twitter post, 25 November 2011, 1:56 AM, <a href="https://twitter.com/#!/El_Deeb/status/140006010197786624">https://twitter.com/#!/El_Deeb/status/140006010197786624</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-5" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-5-backlink">5</a>.&#9;Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, <em>A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia</em>, London: Athlone Press, 1988, p. 239.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-6" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-6-backlink">6</a>.&#9;The most direct use of this strategy has come from the Occupy the Buffer Zone (OBZ) movement in Cyprus. OBZ transformed a part of the ‘buffer zone’ between the Greek-Cypriot and the Turk-Cypriot border into the only space on the island where a symbiosis amongst members of two communities became possible. ‘We are living the solution’ was appropriately one of the main slogans of the occupation. See <a href="http://occupythebufferzone.wordpress.com/">http://occupythebufferzone.wordpress.com/</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-7" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-7-backlink">7</a>.&#9;See, Haraway, ‘A Cyborg Manifesto’.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-8" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-8-backlink">8</a>.&#9;Michael D. Lemonick, ‘Robotic Roaches Do the Trick’, <em>Time</em>, 15 November 2007, <a href="http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0.8599.1684427.00.html?imw=Y">http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0.8599.1684427.00.html?imw=Y</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-9" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-9-backlink">9</a>.&#9;Anver M. Emon, Ellen Lust and Audrey Macklin, ‘We Are All Khaled Said: An Interview with the Administrators of the Facebook Page that Fuelled the Egyptian Revolution’, <em>Boston Review</em>, 3 November 2011, <a href="http://www.bostonreview.net/BR36.6/khaled_said_facebook_egypt_revolution.php">http://www.bostonreview.net/BR36.6/khaled_said_facebook_egypt_revolution.php</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-10" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-10-backlink">10</a>.&#9;Amira Yahyaoui, interview with authors, 25 September 2011.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-309288-11" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-309288-11-backlink">11</a>.&#9;Deleuze and Guattari, <em>A Thousand Plateaus</em>, p. 241.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
