<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>unlike-us-reader-13</title>
		<link href="css/unlike-us-reader-chap13.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="unlike-us-reader" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<h1 id="toc_marker-12" class="article-title"><a id="Silence---Delirium--Lies-" />Silence, Delirium, Lies?</h1>
			<p class="slash">/</p>
			<h2 class="author-name"><a href="unlike-us-reader-34.xhtml#bassett">8834457351</a></h2>
		</div>
		<div>
			<p class="quote"><em>We tell the truth best by becoming lies.</em><sup><a id="footnote-301299-1-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-1">1</a></sup><em></em></p>
			<p>One way to respond to the monopoly of commercial social media is to stop communicating. Resist terminal integration into expanding communicative circuits reaching far beyond the screen. There are various options: switch off, turn away, misspeak, refuse to play – or become silent. Don’t make the social noise that generates the exploitable signals.</p>
			<p>Such forms of communicational dissidence are rather rare. Few people actively disconnect – although many drift off various sites. Individual Facebook withdrawal, often framed as an ultimate disengagement from ‘me media’, for instance, is relatively uncommon; perhaps because those who would do it are only too aware of those left chattering about their ‘demise’ in now inaccessible places. Calls for a shared switch off, which might have potential as a collective response to various forms of communication monopolies, also tend to have little resonance, once again, perhaps because of the uncertainty about <em>in which space</em> such a response would resonate. We are in the grip of media-centricity – the perspective that says life finds significance through ‘the media’ – and we reify communication.</p>
			<p>In fact, there is more than indifference here; to suggest that a critical response to social media’s voracious demands for <em>more</em> material might be to produce <em>less</em> of it doesn’t appear to be acceptable at all. Moreover, this is the case not only amongst those who endorse social media and the environments it co-produces, but also amongst many people wary of the commoditized modes of communication social media enables. To become silent, to fail to contribute, to frustrate communication, to refuse to network, to <em>un-compute</em>; these are all activities which provoke widespread suspicion and unease. </p>
			<p>Maybe this response is not so surprising. Silence is traditionally a weapon of the powerful, given that it is the weak who are silenced and the strong whose voices are heard; one reason why it appears an unlikely element of any plan to free up communication. Moreover there is the widespread sense (in the West but also elsewhere) that a certain kind of communicational plenitude has only just been won. The specter of a ‘before’ characterized by information and communication deficit haunts the present – and updates itself automatically. Consider, for instance, the mass media forms defined by immense asynchronism (e.g. broadcasting’s lack of a back-channel) that framed the web in the 1990s, or that same 1990s web, now framed as the hopelessly lacking ‘before’ that is contrasted with the ‘properly social’ qualities of the (post) Web 2.0 world. It is easy to create almost mythical accounts of the very recent past in which communicational technologies appear baroque in their peculiar inadequacies – silver halides, party lines, phones, degrading reproduction cycles, two or three television channels, phones stuck to walls, nothing <em>personal, </em>let alone<em> personalized.</em></p>
			<p>Combine these two together and the result is a lock-in (keep communicating at all costs). Moves from restriction to ubiquity in communications media are related not only to media systems themselves, but are also taken to describe more general developments; social media is mapped onto consumer power (personalization) and old media linked to lack of choice (Fordism) and the rise of ‘free’ social media is associated with the rise of political freedom, while its other, old/passive media, always stands for the obverse of that. Such multiple associations, becoming naturalized, make it easy to miss the obvious discrepancies that arise when real formations are explored. Consider for instance the assertion that the rise of a commercial social media platform offering more for ‘free’ (more ‘free’ space for content, more ‘choice’ about ways to connect and organize it), <em>automatically</em> advances other forms of freedom – for instance, values fundamental to social justice or democracy. The distinction between ‘freedom and free beer’ is real – and yet it is all too often elided. To assert that we ‘now’ have communicational plenty and that this brings with it other ‘plenty’ (plenty of freedom, plenty of justice) has ideological effects; notably it contributes to a wariness about any strategy or tactic or argument in favor of any form of media politics that looks like it may result in (a return to) restriction, channel narrowing, message frustration – or media silence.</p>
			<p>In response to this formation, indeed seeking to disrupt it, I begin not with slippery discourses of freedom (and democracy) but with growth – and with the neoliberal desire to ‘free-up’ growth. It is my contention that to call for <em>less</em> communication – at its most extreme a call for silence – is heretical in conditions of social media above all because such a call confronts the fetishizing of the <em>more</em> associated with technological progress, when the latter is regarded as inseparable from progress in general – and when both are aligned with discourses that value growth as a social good.</p>
			<p>Many who question growth agendas in other areas do not question technological progress, and where they see problems with technology, or with a particular implementation, seek a specifically technological fix. Technological good, communicational good, and social good; here is another set of alignments – and we can note that good is defined in terms of <em>more</em>. Consider that it is widely regarded as anti-social <em>not</em> to be in favor of building community through increasing the density of connections (getting more wired). Moreover, such a stance tends to be regarded not only as anti-social but also – and it is clear how the two are integrally connected here – as anti-technological. So, a community that blooms and buzzes, and that is more (digitally) connected, is judged to be more ‘healthy’, more ‘open’, more ‘welcoming’, even more ‘alive’ or ‘human’.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-2-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-2">2</a></sup> In these contexts, demands to reduce communicational traffic appear reactionary. In England at least, the old accusation of Luddism is dusted down and made ready for redeployment.</p>
			<p>To fail to contribute to the volume or density (and note that density becomes capacity alarmingly fast) of the social environment is to blaspheme in a world in which growth is deified and in which technological growth is aligned with progress. This text, having no problems with such blasphemy, investigates ways in which silence and related forms of communicational revolt might constitute an appropriate response to social media monopoly. It is because this demand – at its most extreme becoming a demand for silence, but not restricted to that – is thoroughly unacceptable that it is also intriguing.</p>
			<p>Central to the arguments developed here is the work of the 20th century activist and thinker Ivan Illich – who explored technological monopolies and (separately) silence as a response to earlier electronic media systems. Illich demanded the establishment of the silent commons as a response to what he saw as the tyranny of the amplified voice and the evisceration of human relations within the electronically organized spaces such amplifications produced.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-3-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-3">3</a></sup></p>
			<p>Illich was writing about television and associated media systems, but in this article I ask if a return to silence might enable new forms of common space to be created today – so that individual and collective voices might be heard again beyond the personalized enclosures of the commercial social media platforms. Something Illich’s thinking can open up is the sense that there are ways of thinking about language – perhaps in terms of volume, audibility/silence, voice, complexity, and polysemy – that enable it to become the basis for a response to social media monopoly, for a communication politics that might, despite <em>beginning</em> in the symbolic, be able to spill over into something – some places – more material.</p>
			<p>This is an approach beginning with the senses (listening, silence, audibility) and as part of this, along with silence, I consider the potential found in the texture of language and speech when it is divorced from meaning and becomes a form of glossolalia. Finally I turn back from the senses to consider the revolutionary capacities that symbolic language holds within itself – its ability to signify two things at once, which means, as Walter Benjamin put it, that it can ‘communicate <em>something</em> (other than itself)’.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-4-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-4">4</a></sup> This opening, which is also re-doubling, is at its most concentrated in the figure of metaphor, constituted by forcing together a truth and a lie to make something new. It is also here perhaps that natural language is furthest from coded instruction. Silence, delirious language, and the lie are all inimical to Facebook and its ilk for the kinds of communicational economy social media platforms operate and architect. And so, if the truth we want to tell is one that does not want to give itself away (for instance if we do not wish to be ‘used’ instrumentally even as we speak to excoriate such forms of ‘use’), then in today’s conditions, in times when our selves, amongst other things, are harvested through our communicational acts, we may be silent. Or, as one of the novelist China Miéville’s characters puts it in <em>Embassytown</em>, a recent science fiction work celebrating language for its ability to become revolutionary, we may ‘tell the truth best by becoming lies’.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-5-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-5">5</a></sup></p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">A Walk in Embasssytown…<strong></strong></h3>
			<p>A brief foray into Miéville’s novelistic world may be a useful place to start. It is an exploration of how a monopoly over communication systems, and in particular a monopoly over translation – where a word must always face two ways at once (but the question is how) – may become an instrument for the maintenance of social power. However it also explores how those who wish to contest this monopoly may also take up language as a tactical weapon. In this case the tactics include silence and muteness, the exploitation of linguistic delirium (glossolalia). Above all however, Miéville is celebrating the resilient power and force of metaphorical language to open new worlds and shake established hierarchies. All of this, it is true, takes place far away (in a remote world ‘beyond the Immer’ in Miéville’s writing, and for us, in a fictional universe). Despite that, <em>Embassytown, </em>fictional and remote, is at the same time, all about here, now, today. Investigating contexts and ways in which language may face two ways at once it is also a contemporary commentary on linguistic conditions or relations at a time of dawning social media monopoly.<strong class="char-style-override-1"></strong></p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">…And a Return to Social Media<strong></strong></h3>
			<p>Let’s return to consider the operations of actually existing social media; specifically platforms and architectures where what takes place in natural language also always takes place as technology – another re-doubled articulation.</p>
			<p>That social media is Janus-faced is self-evident perhaps, but it is nonetheless something easy to overlook. In fact a peculiarity of technologically mediated communications of many kinds is the way in which users are invited to ignore the specifically technical operations that are intrinsic to their functioning (consider that one of the attractions of social media platforms for many is that their affordances are easily experienced as ‘non-technological’). These platforms are designed to suggest that in speaking, writing, querying, in using language online, people are simply carrying on doing what they have ‘always done’. iPhone conversations or tweets, after all, take place in English or French or Chinese and spell checkers or word processors use familiar dictionaries. And though some have argued that language ‘itself’ degrades in conditions of its word processing, there is, to counter that, ample evidence of linguistic creation and innovation in response to a new medium; to (almost) paraphrase Volosinov, language endures as it becomes<sup><a id="footnote-301299-6-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-6">6</a></sup>. Within the framing of the various social media platforms through which interaction increasingly is routed, speech retains the power, given by metaphorical language, to open new worlds, to innovate semantically, to say this and mean that at the same time. But something nonetheless is different. And the difference is that even as these interactions in language are represented on screen in ways that imply business as usual – only so much more of it – another business is being simultaneously transacted; <em>another mouth is eating you up</em>.</p>
			<p>Our interactions are, as a condition of being embarked upon, captured in code, added to databases, and processed and annotated in various ways. What’s said and done in one language (natural language in all its complexity) is thus simultaneously rendered into non-equivocal digital code. In this second form it is quantifiable, marketable, and – paradoxically since it consists of material concerning social interaction – no longer accessible to you-the-human, since you do not control its further circulation. And in that process, which produces a system of communication beyond speech and language, the metaphorical reference of words, their capacity to continue to refer beyond themselves, and thereby create, is discarded. Ambiguity and polysemy is not appreciated in such processing and creativity is certainly not the organizing principle; rather the aim is disambiguation, efficient chunking. It is true, is it not, that the last thing Facebook wants is data about you that lies?</p>
			<p>By the way, you know all this already. There is no conspiracy implied here. This is the process to which you-the-user consent. The contract is very clear; social media demands personal data donation as the price for full engagement in those forms of communication that are becoming intrinsic to everyday life and that increasingly shape it. This exchange is the central component of what has emerged over at least a decade and a half as the standard model for the commoditized virtual community of all kinds (see for instance the early GeoCities’ contracts for a pre-millennium example<sup><a id="footnote-301299-7-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-7">7</a></sup>). As noted, however, if this exchange is formally speaking open, one side of the operations it authorizes is under-represented (actually un-represented) to users, and this produces a systematically distorted view of who or what is being communicated to what or whom. It is partly because of our reliance on the ocular<sup><a id="footnote-301299-8-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-8">8</a></sup> – the degree to which our habitual focus on the visual may bind us to the screen, and lead us to largely ignore what else is going on – that it makes sense to me to consider a response to social media monopoly that draws on auditory categories (e.g. noise and silence) and that might mistrust – seek to listen through, or still the noise of, the screen. A sonic perspective (even if a virtualized one) provides a fresh way to audit social media operations.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">The Various Contents of Silence<strong></strong></h3>
			<p>I noted earlier that silence – silencing – has often been a tactic of the powerful. But now I want to qualify that silence has also been a tactic adopted by dominated groups, and has become the basis of freedom claims. Alongside calls for the right to speech, after all, have come calls for the right to silence – and in some ways these are more fundamental. Protests made in silence (perhaps made <em>of</em> silence) have been effective – not least in conditions of radical monopoly of media and communications, for instance when a communications monopoly is held by the state. It is useful to note that revolutions have begun, not with Twitter, but with and in silence<sup><a id="footnote-301299-9-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-9">9</a></sup>; in a public silence that, if it refuses to make a statement, nonetheless <em>contains</em> – and <em>contains</em> <em>audibly</em> – all kinds of intentions.</p>
			<p>If we are going to re-think what silence can do, it makes sense to also re-think what it <em>is</em>. Silence has been conventionally defined as the absence of noise, and although noise itself is understood differently in various contexts, in many registers noise is unwanted sound. In information theory for instance, the distinction between noise and signal is supposed to define wanted information and unwanted distortion and so silence might be taken to indicate a lack of signal as well as lack of noise – an entire absence. In contrast however, consider the explorations of John Cage, the 20th century composer noted for <em>4’33’’,</em> the ‘silent’ work.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-10-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-10">10</a></sup> This led to different conclusions – and sparked new forms of thinking about silence. What is useful here is to note that for Cage silence is never absolute, nor absolutely empty.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-11-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-11">11</a></sup> After experiencing an anechoic chamber where he heard two sounds of his own bodily systems (a double hum), his conclusion was that human life and silence are inimical. Humans, as embodied creatures, cannot experience absolute silence. <em>4’33”</em>, often thought to produce empty space, is thus more properly understood as an exploration of the sounds that filled the space <em>produced</em> by a score that ensured the absence of <em>deliberate</em> or <em>programmed</em> sound.</p>
			<p>In a more recent investigation of silence Sarah Maitland discovered the sonic qualities of silent landscapes (the desert versus the hill, the moorland, the sea). In doing so she also opened up ways to think about the various contents of silence.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-12-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-12">12</a></sup> In a deeply personal (and in the end eschatological) quest, Maitland also explored the distinction between environmentally-given quiet (the still wind in the desert) and the absence of human interaction or human voice. Her escape, like many hermits before her, was not only from the clamor of the town or settlement, but from the conventions of constant connection involved in everyday life within a community. Moreover, if it was the latter she wished to escape from most urgently, it was the former – the landscapes of silence, <em>which are the spaces that silence makes</em> – that drew her in. Maitland never explores explicitly technologically produced spaces (virtual worlds for instance), but her account is relevant here because she is nonetheless responding to a general environment (an everyday life) increasingly operating according to the generalized communicational logics of noise acceleration produced by radical monopoly. Looking at the increased noisiness of the world, she might be said to find in silence a way of answering it back.</p>
			<p>Maitland records her progressive retreat from the world so this is in some way a public response to contemporary social conditions (as it might have been a public/private gesture for some of the hermits whose history she traces out). However it is clear that, at its root, this is a private refusal or reorientation. Which provokes another question – what are the prospects for deploying or demanding this kind of content-filled silence in relation to information and communication, and its noise, if this is done as a <em>collective</em> response?</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">The Silent Commons</h3>
			<p>This takes me back to 1983, when Illich made his call for the defense of the Silent Commons.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-13-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-13">13</a></sup> This call, essentially a manifesto, declares that silence is a shared condition placed under threat by new technologies and their amplificatory functions. It is a critique of mass media, regarded as a deeply non-convivial technology in which communication ‘machines’ provide prostheses and do so selectively so that certain dominant groups become <em>louder hailers</em> with the power to silence others. The hailer, whose own voice has become inhuman or artificial, is through this action denying others the right to become fully recognized as people. This is because, as Illich sees it, having a voice (perhaps the ability to speak out), is something he views as ‘necessary for the emergence of persons’, and is here disabled.<strong class="char-style-override-1"></strong></p>
			<p>In the place of a common environment within which any voice can sound out, in conditions of amplification (or here mediatization) an <em>enclosed</em> space is formed, in which voice becomes the prerogative of the one who holds the amplifier. The call for a shared right to silence is thus made because it is silence that is needed to enable human voices to be heard again. The call for a silent commons spatializes that and makes of it a demand for the restitution of public space (a public soundscape). For Illich, enabling that right entails the removal of the ‘loud speakers’ (humans and technologies) that enclose what was previously an open space; a de-privatization. It is evident that for Illich, suspicious of mass communication technologies in general, the ‘loud speakers’ are both those who speak loudly (the powerful) <em>and</em> the tools through which they assert their dominance (the amplification technologies themselves).</p>
			<p>In the case of social media and its operational imperatives, it might be argued, extending Illich, that public space is not only enclosed but radically attenuated. The result being that what was an engagement in public (speaking out in a place in which voice may be heard) becomes placeless – because entirely personalized – interaction.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-14-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-14">14</a></sup> The result of this might be that all voices may speak, but not into a common place where they are likely to be heard as one (common) voice. Fears that today’s information networks produce endless communication loops that lead nowhere, widely discussed – particularly by Jodi Dean – have connections with Illich’s sense of enclosure foreclosing on listening. At any rate the silent commons thesis is certainly distrustful of the efficacy of communication – against which it sets human voice, and in particular distrustful of <em>volume</em>. It attacks the ideology that defines freedom as giving ‘everybody’ a platform, so there are more platforms and each speaks more loudly from them than before, preferring instead silence as that which can enable conditions-in-common necessary to enable all or any voice to speak.</p>
			<p>This might suggest the key task is to defend and build a public commons, or a common space, out of digital materials. But the implications of acting against enclosure are not constrained to virtual space (and it is not clear really what this means in conditions of ecological media) but entail claims to rights in real space. It might be said they join up with what Harvey has termed the rights to the city<sup><a id="footnote-301299-15-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-15">15</a></sup> – and they do so not least because the communicational is part of the fabric of the lived, the at once material and immaterial environment.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Conviviality as a Relation?</h3>
			<p>For Illich, the way to restitute a commons would be to re-establish environments no longer enclosed by the ordering of amplification. In such places public discussion could take place again; conviviality might be re-established. This aim is strikingly at odds with social media’s promise to provide a common platform delivering amplification for all. Following Illich’s general logic (if not his precise allocations of convivial and non-convivial labels to specific media), this kind of amplification/interaction does not enable human interaction but in instantiating the enclosing logics of the radical monopoly, it rather tends to contain and commoditize it.</p>
			<p>By-passing the determinism implicit in Illich’s account, but retaining his sense of the techno-social shaping of technological systems as they are instantiated within real political systems (which group gets to <em>control</em> the loud speakers), might demand relocating qualities of conviviality or non-conviviality. Instead of asking if one technology or another is fundamentally convivial or not, we could ask how or where (in which communicational architectures) convivial <em>relations</em> become possible and can be sustained<sup><a id="footnote-301299-16-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-16">16</a></sup> and where they are made impossible.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-17-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-17">17</a></sup></p>
			<p>One example of this kind of engagement – and one that shows how silence may be suggestive and how it may operate to produce convivial relations – are the communicational tactics of some within the Occupy<em> </em>movement<em>.</em> In particular the gestural commentaries those listening provide to supplement – rather than interrupt – those speaking are of note here. These non-sounded, non-amplified, commentaries respect silence as that out of which a voice comes. These groups take up space rather than seeking only to communicate in the public sphere, and in doing so they generate forms of (silent) talk that are far from the competitive ‘noise’ of Facebook<sup><a id="footnote-301299-18-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-18">18</a></sup> – and that have proved markedly difficult to handle or recuperate.</p>
			<p>Assessing silence as a tactic, asking how efficacious it might be as a critical response to social media, thus demands asking how silence can be a common concern. And to stress, when I talk about demanding silence here, I am not talking of an injunction to silently and individually withdraw. Silence is being invoked positively, as a means to shape a different kind of un-privatized/de-enclosed communal space, as the necessary conditions for a new kind of communicational commons. This in itself might operate to question/expose the dynamics of mass personalization – a divide and rule – which invites the valorization of personal responses (and responsibilities) whilst operating on people as a mass.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-19-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-19">19</a></sup><strong class="char-style-override-1"></strong></p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Resilience</h3>
			<p>This talk of silence might seem to be very defensive. For instance it might seem to advance the idea that language (natural language) should be <em>defended</em> from code, that speaking out-loud should be embarked upon with extreme caution not so much through fear of betrayal – ‘be careful what you say’ – but through fear of contamination. Fear of the technocratic contamination of language is a line that has been taken. This famous example of the depredations of language explored by Orwell in <em>1984</em> as Newspeak is a relevant example. Here words such as ‘good’, ‘plusgood’, ‘doubleplus good’<sup><a id="footnote-301299-20-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-20">20</a></sup><em> </em>exemplify the construction of a form of language from which ambiguity/polysemy is to be progressively purged. The intended result of Newspeak was that what could not be entirely quantified could not be articulated at all – <em>even in silence</em>. What could be quantified meanwhile would be reduced to the unambiguous basics: positive versus negative, good versus bad – and to pure hate (there is no opposite to this pair since love has been exorcised).</p>
			<p>The line being taken here is different. The focus is on finding and enabling resources in language. The intention is to exploit the potential of silence to make a containing space for language to be heard, to consider the force of the voice against the enclosures of meaning, and to draw on the ambiguity and redoubling of metaphorical language – and ask if they can be deployed as a response to developing social media monopoly. We are now halfway there, since we have already established that things can be done with silence – which latter may be understood not as empty, but as containing and framing all kinds of things.<strong class="char-style-override-1"></strong></p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Glossolalia as Delinquent Sound <strong></strong></h3>
			<p class="quote"><em>[Q]uick-lying: the spitting out of a tumble of noises before the untruth of their totality stole a speaker’s ability to think them.</em><sup><a id="footnote-301299-21-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-21">21</a></sup><strong class="char-style-override-1"></strong></p>
			<p>It is through the notion of framing and enabling that silence might be related to glossolalia, or speaking in tongues. Glossolalia is a game with the fabric of voice, ‘a semblance of language’ that can be imitated when its phonetic rules are known,<sup><a id="footnote-301299-22-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-22">22</a></sup> as the cultural theorist de Certeau put it. This form of speech at once offers meaning and refuses it; what seems like language slides away and is revealed as a chimera. The glossolalic speaks ‘so as not to be tricked by words’,<sup><a id="footnote-301299-23-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-23">23</a></sup> but also tricks the listener. Perhaps then, this kind of speech may also have potential to trick those contemporary mechanisms through which our words are captured. Illich wanted to restitute to people their ‘proper and equal voice’ through the re-founding of genuinely common space for debate. Glossolalia in contrast points to the potentials found in the improper qualities of voice. It withholds language while promising to speak it, but <em>by</em> promising to speak it holds an offer of some form of connection or communion, one that is by definition outside of meaningful transactions. To re-instate the commons, to find grounds that are not entirely and immediately amenable to extraction, to break the hold of monopoly, ways need to be found to draw on what is suggested by the fullness and thickness of voice. </p>
			<p>It is said that glossolalia is not an exceptional state. De Certeau, suggests that it ‘pushes up through the cracks of ordinary conversation: bodily noises, quotations of delinquent sounds, and fragments of others’ voices punctuate the order of sentences with breaks and surprises’.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-24-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-24">24</a></sup> Nonetheless, the more routine but still marvelous capacity of language to point beyond itself and therefore to innovate through its capacity to symbolize and mean, might in the end be more suggestive than glossolalia and the seductive promises found in the grain of nonsensical speech – the choice is innovation over delirium perhaps. I return to this below, but insist here that both language’s improper and its poetic aspects – the form found in glossolalia, the latter exemplified in the productivity of metaphor – can be brought into play.</p>
			<p>Both that is, might help constitute the unlikely fabric with which at least one form of a silent commons – where what is said is listened to but not captured – might be woven. It is interesting to remember that in China Miéville’s <em>Embassytown</em> tricks in the texture of language – <em>the spitting out of a tumble of noises </em>– are used to find ways into metaphor with its capacity to make meanings out of impossible combinations.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Language, Code, Politics</h3>
			<p>It may be useful to be clear that the wager here is that, despite the accelerating tendencies towards radical forms of social media monopoly (Illich’s useful distinction of radical monopoly is not the Ford but the car), a response is still possible. More specifically a media and communications <em>politics</em> is still possible. Some say it is not. Jodi Dean’s<sup><a id="footnote-301299-25-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-25">25</a></sup> argument that communication can only communicate with itself, for instance, essentially means that any hope for the transformation of digital systems can come only from outside these loops (as an unexpected event that throws entire social orders into disarray for instance). It is possible to sympathize with this position (and to appreciate the degree to which it de-centers media and communication systems and demands more material forms of engagement) whilst also wishing to consider the resources available for the development of a more proximate response, perhaps even a medium-centric response, to social media monopoly and digital transformation. This – as well as elsewhere – is where we find ourselves.</p>
			<p>Chief amongst these resources are language and code. One way to distinguish how they have been used is once again to think about sensory bias: sound or vision?</p>
			<p>Critical software studies theorists (and activists) working to develop a code politics have often been concerned with questions of visibility. Such approaches begin by prioritizing ‘making visible’ or foregrounding those <em>un-represented</em> code operations (discussed above) that users know about but are enjoined to ignore. They may then move on to argue such processes need to be better understood (digital literacy), or that we need to understand how to intervene in them (code literacy), so that they may be exploited in new ways – or subverted or turned (re-coded). The final step set out here is a hacker response essentially; it seeks to get <em>close enough</em> (to code or metal) or <em>see</em> what’s going on. To me, these kinds of approaches (code studies, software studies of various kinds), become most compelling when they set out to consider not only code (what should be done about code), but those combinations of language/code with which this article has also been concerned.</p>
			<p>What is then argued for is the necessity of learning to speak in two tongues at once.<sup><a id="footnote-301299-26-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-26">26</a></sup> The necessity of cultivating new forms of re-doubled intelligence is insisted upon. <em>Like machines then, humans should be capable of facing two ways at once?</em></p>
			<p>We already do, of course, being speakers of a language that has at its heart the ability to make meanings out of impossible assertions (‘the city is a heart’ says Miéville) and to point beyond itself (Benjamin again). But the software arguments imply a different kind of re-doubling or double vision, of course. The intention is to speak in natural language and in machine code; to look in and out of the machine.</p>
			<p>One of the issues here is that a call for double intelligence may amount only to learning to speak or write code better<sup><a id="footnote-301299-27-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-301299-27">27</a></sup> (since we already speak natural language); once again then the focus returns to code. Another is that it presumes the natural desirability of remaking code into something <em>more</em> capable of accommodating – handling – natural language. This is something that might be viewed as simply upping the efficiency of the recuperation process. Of course this might be set aside, or regarded as beside the point. If it is however, this is because the focus on code – as an abstraction – obscures the issue of social media <em>monopoly</em>; which is to say the issue of software as instantiated in a specific techno-social system (which to me is the point). It might also obscure the question of scales – code may be handled better, or become less <em>obscure</em>, but the limits of particular forms of comprehension (what may be un-covered by code excellence or virtuosity) rather than for instance handled in other ways remain.</p>
			<p>This implies more hostility than I intend. I agree in many ways: responding to social media monopoly might in the end require both thinking about code work to be undertaken <em>and</em> a politics engaging with language. From the general perspective of software studies, this might be based on what I would term a politics based on convergence; the development of forms of language and forms of code that slide closer together – the production of unnatural code and code-like natural language perhaps. However, the perspectives on language and silence developed earlier in this text can be used to think about something very far from this. Rejoining a revolt in language with a revolt in code, might demand, paradoxically, not natural language that is almost machine code (or vice versa), but something entirely different. It might for instance demand re-thinking translation itself – and also re-thinking its limits; <em>not trying to face two ways, but rather re-considering the moment of, the language of, the texture of, the sound of, intersection itself?</em></p>
			<p>Such potential re-combinations, which might draw up code and language into a new media politics are suggestive. But I want finally to return to the question: <em>more or less</em>? This text has been framed by a belief that social media monopolies ought to be disrupted – and in the name of at least two of the things they are axiomatically understood to promote (social justice, solidarity as a form of community) and do not. It has been argued that this disruption might be attempted through a toolset – silence, disruption of language, and the exploitation of language’s capacity for polysemy (the metaphor and the lie) – that is not often considered as apt for such a task. My argument, and here I return to salute Ivan Illich, is that these tools <em>can</em> be deployed to produce other kinds of more convivial engagements – better commons – than our apparently ‘social’ media enable. Above all, I have wished to take seriously the idea that communication density, and increasing communicational volume, does not – in and of itself – indicate more understanding, freedom, openness, or ‘good’. And that <em>demands</em> also taking seriously the idea of a media politics that begins with silence.</p>
			<p><em>Thanks to Miriam Rasch for her patience, and to Janneke Adema and the Coventry Open Media Seminar for a vocal discussion of silence.</em></p>
			<h6 class="references_title">References</h6>
			<p class="references">Bassett, Caroline. <em>The Arc and the Machine</em>, Manchester: Manchester UP, 2007. </p>
			<p class="references">Benjamin, Walter. ‘On Language as Such and on the Language of Man’, in Walter Benjamin, <em>One-Way Street and other Writings</em>, London: New Left Books, 1979, pp. 107-123. </p>
			<p class="references">Braham, Sandra. ‘When Nightingales Break the Law: Silence and the Construction of Reality’, <em>Ethics and Information Technology </em>9<a id="Anker-1191" /> (2007): 281-95.</p>
			<p class="references">Cage, John. <em>4’33’’</em>, musical score, first performed 1952, Woodstock, NY.</p>
			<p class="references">______. <em>An Autobiographical Statement</em>, New Albion Records, 1990, </p>
			<p class="references"><a href="http://www.newalbion.com/artists/cagej/autobiog.html">http://www.newalbion.com/artists/cagej/autobiog.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">de Certeau, Michel. ‘Vocal Utopias: Glossolalias’, <em>Representations (Special Issue: The New Erudition)</em> 56 (Autumn, 1996): 29-47. </p>
			<p class="references">Dean, Jodi. <em>Democracy and Other Neoliberal Fantasies: Communicative Capitalism and Left Politics</em>, North Carolina: Duke UP, 2009. </p>
			<p class="references">Dyson, Frances. <em>Sounding New Media: Immersion and Embodiment in the Arts and Culture</em>, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009. </p>
			<p class="references">Fuller, Matthew. <em>Software Studies: A Lexicon</em>,<em> </em>London: MIT, 2008.</p>
			<p class="references">Gilroy, Paul. <em>After Empire: Melancholia or Convivial Culture</em>, London: Verso, 2004. </p>
			<p class="references">Harvey, David. ‘The Right to the City’, <em>New Left Review</em> 53 (2008): 23-40.</p>
			<p class="references">Illich, Ivan. <em>Tools for Conviviality</em>, 1973, <a href="http://www.opencollector.org/history/homebrew/tools.html">http://www.opencollector.org/history/homebrew/tools.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">______. ‘Silence is a Commons’, <em>CoEvolution Quarterly</em> (Winter, 1983),<a href="http://www.preservenet.com/theory/Illich/Silence.html">http://www.preservenet.com/theory/Illich/Silence.html</a>. </p>
			<p class="references">Maitland, Sarah. <em>A Book of Silence</em>, London: Granta, 2008. </p>
			<p class="references">Mateas, Michael. ‘Weird Languages’, in Matt Fuller (ed.) <em>Software Studies\A lexicon. </em>London: MIT, 2008, p. 267-276.</p>
			<p class="references">Miéville, China. <em>Embassytown</em>, London: Pan Macmillan, 2011.</p>
			<p class="references">Orwell, George. <em>1984</em>, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1989.</p>
			<p class="references">Pariser, Eli. <em>The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You</em>, London: Penguin, 2011. </p>
			<p class="references-last">Volosinov, V.N. <em>Marxism and the Philosophy of Language</em>, Seminar Press, New York, 1973.</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h6 class="references_title">Notes</h6>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-1" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-1-backlink">1</a>.&#9;China Miéville, <em>Embassytown</em>, London: Pan Macmillan, 2011, p. 296. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-2" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-2-backlink">2</a>.&#9;Today noise levels are said to be increasing in most societies, an increase widely accepted as an inevitable (side) effect of progress (anti-noise campaigns not withstanding). This has produced a market for forms of commoditized noise control and acoustic anti-pollution movements. For a consideration of rising noise see Sandra Braham, ‘When Nightingales Break the Law: Silence and the Construction of Reality’, <em>Ethics and Information Technology </em>9 (2007): pp. 281-95. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-3" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-3-backlink">3</a>.&#9;See, Ivan Illich, <em>Tools for Conviviality</em>, 1973, <a href="http://www.opencollector.org/history/homebrew/tools.html">http://www.opencollector.org/history/homebrew/tools.html</a>; and Ivan Illich, ‘Silence is a Commons’, <em>CoEvolution Quarterly</em> (Winter, 1983),<a href="http://www.preservenet.com/theory/Illich/Silence.html">http://www.preservenet.com/theory/Illich/Silence.html</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-4" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-4-backlink">4</a>.&#9;Miéville quoting Benjamin in the epigram to <em>Embassytown</em>. (Originally from Walter Benjamin, ‘On Language as Such and on the Language of Man’, in Walter Benjamin, <em>One-Way Street and other Writings</em>, London: New Left Books, 1979, pp. 107-123.) </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-5" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-5-backlink">5</a>.&#9;Miéville, <em>Embassytown</em>, p. 296.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-6" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-6-backlink">6</a>.&#9;V.N. Volosinov, <em>Marxism and the Philosophy of Language</em>, New York: Seminar Press, 1973.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-7" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-7-backlink">7</a>.&#9;Caroline Bassett, <em>The Arc and the Machine</em>, Manchester: Manchester UP, 2007. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-8" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-8-backlink">8</a>.&#9;See for example, Frances Dyson’s considerations of ocular prioritization. However, I am not arguing that digital media ‘is an aural media’. It seems to me that retaining an ocular-centric point of view is often useful in relation to exploring social media networks precisely because it underscores how the degree to which interactions remain/retain centered around forms of screen-based interaction – if emphatically not on life – on screens. (Frances Dyson, <em>Sounding New Media: Immersion and Embodiment in the Arts and Culture</em>, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-9" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-9-backlink">9</a>.&#9;Consider for instance the missing applause that signalled the beginning of the end of the Stalinist regime in Romania. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-10" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-10-backlink">10</a>.&#9;John Cage’s musical score <em>4’33”</em> was first performed in Woodstock, NY, in 1952.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-11" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-11-backlink">11</a>.&#9;John Cage, <em>An Autobiographical Statement</em>, New Albion Records, 1990,<a href="http://www.newalbion.com/artists/cagej/autobiog.html">http://www.newalbion.com/artists/cagej/autobiog.html</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-12" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-12-backlink">12</a>.&#9;Sarah Maitland, <em>A Book of Silence</em>, London: Granta, 2008. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-13" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-13-backlink">13</a>.&#9;Illich, ‘Silence is a Commons’.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-14" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-14-backlink">14</a>.&#9;See, Eli Pariser on social media as database in <em>The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You</em>, Harmsworth: Penguin, 2011; and on GeoCities and its takeover, Bassett, <em>The Arc and the Machine</em>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-15" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-15-backlink">15</a>.&#9;David Harvey, ‘The Right to the City’, <em>New Left Review</em> 53 (2008): 23-40.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-16" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-16-backlink">16</a>.&#9;Paul Gilroy, <em>After Empire: Melancholia or Convivial Culture</em>. London: Verso, 2004.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-17" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-17-backlink">17</a>.&#9;Paul Gilroy has elaborated conviviality as a desirable form of contact in his discussion of race in <em>After Empire, </em>and in other work I have explored its relationship to demands that might be raised around a politics of inter-sectionality. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-18" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-18-backlink">18</a>.&#9;Although they do echo the latter’s affirmative conventions – perhaps this is a genuine reappropriation. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-19" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-19-backlink">19</a>.&#9;For evidence of this standard see social media contracts. These have long made users responsible for their own data whilst also claiming rights of ownership over it. This is an extension of enclosure rights – not only activities but also individuals own data trails, their digital selves, becoming, as a condition of using such enclosed ground, property rights. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-20" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-20-backlink">20</a>.&#9;George Orwell, <em>1984</em>, Harmsworth: Penguin, 1989. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-21" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-21-backlink">21</a>.&#9;Miéville<em> , Embassytown</em>, p.128. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-22" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-22-backlink">22</a>.&#9;Michel de Certeau, ‘Vocal Utopias: Glossolalias’, <em>Representations (Special Issue: The New Erudition)</em> 56 (Autumn, 1996), p. 29. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-23" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-23-backlink">23</a>.&#9;de Certeau, ‘Vocal Utopias’, p. 29. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-24" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-24-backlink">24</a>.&#9;de Certeau, ‘Vocal Utopias’, p. 29.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-25" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-25-backlink">25</a>.&#9;Jodi Dean, <em>Democracy and Other Neoliberal Fantasies: Communicative Capitalism and Left Politics</em>, North Carolina: Duke UP, 2009.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-26" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-26-backlink">26</a>.&#9;See for example, Mathew Fuller, <em>Software Studies: A Lexicon. </em>London: MIT, 2008. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-301299-27" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-301299-27-backlink">27</a>.&#9;See for example, Michael Mateas, ‘Weird Languages’, in Matthew Fuller (ed.) <em>Software Studies: A Lexicon, </em>London: MIT, 2008, pp. 267-276. It is not only in Miéville’s weird sf literature that consciously and wonderfully strange languages are to be found. </p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
