<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>unlike-us-reader-34</title>
		<link href="css/unlike-us-reader.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="unlike-us-reader" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<h1 id="toc_marker-33" class="article-title"><a id="Appendix-1744" /><a id="Appendix-Biographies" />Appendix</h1>
			<p class="slash">/</p>
			<h2 class="appendix_title">Author Biographies</h2>
		</div>
		<div>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-31.xhtml" id="barocas">Solon Barocas</a></strong> is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Media, Culture, and Communication and a Student Fellow at the Information Law Institute at New York University. His research examines epistemological issues in the mining of data, the everyday practices of data miners, and various ethical and political concerns raised by data mining. He is also attached to the Intel Science and Technology Center for Social Computing, where he works under the Algorithmic Living research theme.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-13.xhtml" id="bassett">Caroline Bassett</a></strong> is Reader in Digital Media and co-director of the Centre for Material Digital Culture at the University of Sussex in the UK. Her research explores the digital transformation of cultural forms and practices and she has published widely on narrative and new media, gender and media technologies and recently on sound and the digital environment. She is currently researching forms of hostility to computing and working on network projects on culture and community and on the relationships between science fiction and everyday life. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-24.xhtml" id="bazzichelli">Tatiana Bazzichelli</a></strong> is a Berlin-based researcher, networker, and curator, working in the field of hacktivism and net culture. She is part of the transmediale festival team and works as a Post-doc researcher at Leuphana University (Lüneburg), as part of the Innovation Incubator / Centre for Digital Cultures, and the Institute for Culture and Aesthetic Digital Media. She received her PhD at Aarhus University (DK), where she is now Affiliated Researcher. Her book <em>Networking. La rete come arte | The Net as Artwork</em> was published in 2006. In 2001, Bazzichelli founded the AHA:Activism-Hacking-Artivism project. See, <a href="http://www.networkingart.eu">www.networkingart.eu</a>. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-15.xhtml" id="beer">David Beer</a></strong> is Senior Lecturer in Sociology at the University of York (UK). His research focuses on popular culture and he is the author (with Nick Gane) of <em>New Media: The Key Concepts</em>.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-4.xhtml" id="berry">David M. Berry</a></strong> is Senior Lecturer in Digital Media (Associate Professor in Media Studies) in the department of Political and Cultural Studies at Swansea University, UK. His books include the forthcoming <em>Critical Theory and the Digital</em> (2013), <em>The Philosophy of Software: Code and Mediation in the Digital Age</em> (2011), and <em>Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source</em> (2008). He is co-author of <em>Libre Culture</em> (2008), and editor of <em>Understanding Digital Humanities</em> (2012). His research covers a wide theoretical area including media, culture, political economy, media/medium theory, software studies, actor-network theory, the philosophy of technology, and the computational turn in arts, humanities, and social sciences.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-12.xhtml" id="bunz">Mercedes Bunz</a></strong> lives and writes in London. She is author of <em>The Silent Revolution: How Algorithms Changed Knowledge, Work, Public and Politics</em> <em>without Making too Much Noise</em> (in German, Suhrkamp 2012). Currently she directs a research team exploring the future of scientific publishing in the age of open access and hybrid publishing, at the Centre for Digital Culture at Leuphana University, Lüneburg (Germany). </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-30.xhtml" id="cabello">Florencio Cabello</a></strong> received a PhD in Communication Science from the University of Málaga and is Professor of Technology and Audiovisual Communication at the Communication Sciences Faculty at the same university. His academic work focuses on free culture, commons, and the networked public sphere. His latest paper in English is ‘Beyond WikiLeaks: The Icelandic Modern Media Initiative and the Creation of Free Speech Havens’ (<em>IJOC</em>, 2012). He also collaborates with the social and cultural center of citizen management La Casa Invisible of Málaga (<a href="http://lainvisible.net">lainvisible.net</a>), where he coordinates the Area of Communication and Technologies of Ulex, the Free and Experimental University.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-21.xhtml" id="cirio">Paolo Cirio</a></strong> works as a media artist in various fields: net-art, public-art, video-art, software-art, and experimental fiction. He has won prestigious media art awards and his subversive works have been sustained by research grants and residencies. He has exhibited in international museums and institutions worldwide. As public speaker, he delivers lectures and workshops on tactics of media interventions.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-27.xhtml" id="donovan">Joan Donovan</a></strong> is an organizer with Occupy Los Angeles and a founding member of the InterOccupy international network of activists. She is completing her graduate studies in Sociology and Science Studies at the University of California San Diego. Her research tracks the technologies of social change used by contemporary social movements.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-22.xhtml" id="doulas">Louis Doulas</a></strong> is a writer and researcher based in New York. He is founder and lead editor of <em>Pool</em>, an online platform and publication critically investigating internet culture. Previously he was the New York Correspondent at <em>e-flux</em>, Editorial Fellow at Rhizome at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, and columnist at <em>DINCA</em>. See, <a href="http://www.louisdoulas.info">www.louisdoulas.info</a>.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-17.xhtml" id="evans">Leighton Evans</a></strong> is a PhD candidate at Swansea University, studying the phenomenological effects on the experience of place that emerge from using location-based social networks. His research interests are social media, digital media, ethnography and webnography, phenomenology, continental philosophy, and location based services. In addition to being a student, Leighton Evans is a research assistant and has previously been a college lecturer and web designer for a major charity in his native Wales.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-30.xhtml" id="franco">Marta G. Franco</a></strong> is a journalist and media activist, with a master’s degree in Communication on the internet. She works for <em>Diagonal</em>, a grassroots newspaper based in Madrid, and participates in projects related to hacktivism, feminism and free culture. She investigates social networking within the Lorea collective and the 15M movement. Her main interest is the emergence and self-organization of collective intelligence in analog and digital public spaces.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-19.xhtml" id="gehl">Robert W. Gehl</a></strong> received a PhD in Cultural Studies from George Mason University in 2010. He is currently an assistant professor of new media in the Department of Communication at the University of Utah. His research draws on science and technology studies, software studies, and critical/cultural studies, and focuses on the intersections between technology, subjectivity, and practice. He is currently working on a book entitled <em>Reverse Engineering Social Media</em>. At Utah, he teaches courses in communication technology, composition in new media, and political economy of communication.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-31.xhtml" id="gurses">Seda Gürses</a></strong> is a researcher working on privacy in online social networks, requirements engineering, and privacy enhancing technologies at COSIC, Department of Electrical Engineering, in KU Leuven (Belgium). She is part of the SPION project in which an interdisciplinary team explores the challenges of understanding and addressing privacy problems and processes of responsibilization associated with online social networks. She further works with various arts initiatives on feminist critique of computer science, open source and free software development, as well as surveillance studies.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-30.xhtml" id="hache">Alexandra Haché</a></strong> is a sociologist with a PhD in social economy, and a researcher on ICT for the public good. She has also worked on the impact of social computing and Web 2.0 on civil society’s potential for self-organization and social innovation. Next to that she studied how social movements, and civil society at large, use and develop ICT, and in turn how they communicate about them. This orientation has been marked by her exploration of free software, free culture, and gender relations to ICT. Since 2004 she has been involved in the use and development of free software tools for social and political transformation within neighborhood communities, engaged research networks, immigrant teenagers, and women groups. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-9.xhtml" id="halpin">Harry Halpin</a></strong> is a World Wide Web Consortium (W3C/MIT) Team member, under the direction of Tim Berners-Lee, where he leads efforts in social standardization and cryptography. Dr. Halpin is also currently writing a book on the philosophy of the web under the direction of Bernard Stiegler due to the EC-funded PHILOWEB project at IRI. He completed his PhD at the University of Edinburgh under Andy Clark, available as the book <em>Social Semantics</em>. His work is aimed at evolving the web into a secure platform for free communication in order to enable collective intelligence.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-15.xhtml" id="hardey">Mariann Hardey</a></strong> is Lecturer in Marketing at the Durham University Business School. She specializes in social media and new forms of connectivity.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-9.xhtml" id="hui">Yuk Hui</a></strong> is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Centre for Digital Cultures at Leuphana Universität Lüneburg. Before, he was a research fellow at the Institut de Recherche et d’Innovation (IRI) du Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. Hui holds a PhD in philosophy and an MA in Cultural Studies, both from Goldsmiths, University of London, and a bachelor degree in Computer Engineering from the University of Hong Kong. Hui has been working on different research projects exploring the possibilities of new media technologies on arts and social engagements with cultural and technical institutes such as Tate Gallery, and T-Labs Berlin. See, <a href="http://www.digitalmilieu.net/yuk">www.digitalmilieu.net/yuk</a>. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-14.xhtml" id="ippolita">Ippolita</a></strong> is an international collective for convivial research and writings. Its investigations and workshops deal with (reality) hacking, free software, philosophy, and anthropology of technologies. As a heteronomous identity Ippolita published <em>Open is not Free</em> (2005, IT), <em>The Dark Side of Google</em> (2007, IT-FR-ES-EN), and <em>In the Facebook Aquarium, The Resistible Rise</em><em> of Anarcho-capitalism</em> (2012, IT-ES-FR). The Ippolita independent server provides access to copyleft works that explore cutting edge ‘technologies of domination’ and their social effects. Forthcoming project: rites and beliefs in tech everyday practices. See, <a href="http://www.ippolita.net">www.ippolita.net</a> / <a href="mailto:info@ippolita.net">info@ippolita.net</a>. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-6.xhtml" id="jurgenson">Nathan Jurgenson</a></strong> is a social media theorist and graduate student in sociology at the University of Maryland, working on a dissertation with George Ritzer. Nathan’s research explores the relationship between technology and culture, identity, and power. Beyond publishing on ‘prosumption’ and ‘digital dualism’, Nathan’s dissertation focuses on surveillance and new, social, media technologies. Together with PJ Rey, Nathan founded the <em>Cyborgology</em> blog and the Theorizing the Web conference. His writing also appears in outlets including <em>Corriere della Sera</em>, <em>Salon</em>, <em>The Atlantic</em>, and <em>The New Inquiry</em>. Nathan can be found at @nathanjurgenson. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-26.xhtml" id="kambouri">Nelli Kambouri</a></strong> and <strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-26.xhtml" id="hatzopoulos">Pavlos Hatzopoulos</a></strong> are precarious researchers based in Athens, Greece. They are both currently working on a project on transnational digital networks, migration, and gender, coordinated by the Centre for Gender Studies of the Panteion University, Athens. Kambouri also acts as a scientific advisor for the General Secretariat of Gender Equality, Athens, and Hatzopoulos as a researcher in the Department of Communication and Internet Studies at the Technological University of Cyprus.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-11.xhtml" id="kennedy">Jenny Kennedy</a></strong> is completing a PhD in Media and Communications at Swinburne University of Technology (Melbourne, Australia) where she is based at the Institute for Social Research. Her doctoral thesis examines perceptions and practices of sharing in the context of networked culture. Jenny’s research interests are media theory, social discourses around teletechnology use, and material culture.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-5.xhtml" id="langlois">Ganaele Langlois</a></strong> is Assistant Professor in the Communication Program at the University of Ontario Institute of Technology (Oshawa, Canada), and Associate Director of the Infoscape Centre for the Study of Social Media (<a href="http://www.infoscapelab.ca">www.infoscapelab.ca</a>). Her research focuses on the intersection of software, language, and capitalism. She has published in <em>New Media &amp; Society</em>, <em>Fibreculture</em>, and <em>Culture Machine</em>. She has recently co-authored a book with Greg Elmer and Fenwick McKelvey entitled <em>The Permanent Campaign: New Media, New Politics</em> (Peter Lang).</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-20.xhtml" id="lodi">Simona Lodi</a></strong> is an art critic and curator. Since 1993 she has been writing for the best magazines on contemporary art. She is a contributor of <em>LEA - Leonardo Electronic Almanac</em> and a blogger for <em>The</em> <em>Huffington Post</em> <em>Culture</em> (USA). She is interested in the relationship between art/technology and the impact that digital technology has had on the lives of creative people, curating shows, and writing articles and essays. Simona is the founder and art director of the Share Festival and Action Sharing. She has been online since 1994, and currently lives in Turin.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-2.xhtml" id="lovink">Geert Lovink</a></strong> is the founding director of the Institute of Network Cultures (est. 2004), which is part of his research professor (‘lector’ in Dutch) appointment at the Hoge&#173;school van Amsterdam. He is also Professor of Media Theory at the European Graduate School, and Associate Professor of New Media at the University of Amsterdam. His latest book is <em>Networks Without a Cause</em> (Polity Press, 2012), which is also available in Italian and German.<strong></strong></p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-21.xhtml" id="ludovico">Alessandro Ludovico</a></strong> is an artist, media critic, and editor-in-chief of <em>Neural</em> magazine since 1993. He has published and edited several books, and has lectured worldwide. He’s one of the founders of Mag.Net (Electronic Cultural Publishers organization). He also served as an advisor for Documenta 12’s Magazine Project. He has been a guest researcher at the Willem De Kooning Academy in Rotterdam, and he teaches at the Academy of Art in Carrara. He is one of the authors of the Hacking Monopolism trilogy of artworks (<em>Google Will Eat Itself</em>, <em>Amazon Noir</em>, <em>Face to Facebook</em>).<strong></strong></p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-14.xhtml" id="mancinelli">Tiziana Mancinelli</a></strong> is an activist and researcher based in London. She has been involved in feminist, anti-racist, migrant and sex workers’ rights struggles both in Italy and in the UK. Back in Rome, she was involved with a Free Radio project and, in the UK, with the migrant sex worker rights project ‘X:talk’ (<a href="http://xtalkproject.net">xtalkproject.net</a>). She is currently a PhD candidate in Digital Humanities at the University of Reading.<strong></strong></p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-18.xhtml" id="mcnicol">Andrew McNicol</a></strong> is a PhD candidate at the University of New South Wales, whose studies focus on ‘digital profile systems’, such as social media profiles and census forms, and how their design choices affect issues of equality and freedom. Andrew McNicol can often be observed reading about digital security, listening to 8-bit music, and perusing updated privacy policies of popular social networking sites. Andrew blogs occasionally at <a href="http://exhipigeonist.net">exhipigeonist.net</a>. <strong></strong></p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-8.xhtml" id="miconi">Andrea Miconi</a></strong> teaches Media Studies and Sociology of Culture at IULM University, Milan, Italy, where he works as Assistant Professor. His scientific interests focus on media history, analysis of cultural industries, and critical network theory.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-31.xhtml" id="narayanan">Arvind Narayanan</a></strong> received his PhD in 2009 and is an Assistant Professor in Computer Science at Princeton. He studies information privacy and security and has a side-interest in technology policy. His research has shown that data anonymization is broken in fundamental ways, for which he jointly received the 2008 Privacy Enhancing Technologies Award. He is one of the researchers behind the ‘Do Not Track’ proposal. Narayanan is an affiliated faculty member at the Center for Information Technology Policy at Princeton and an affiliate scholar at Stanford Law School’s Center for Internet and Society.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-22.xhtml" id="niehaus">Wyatt Niehaus</a></strong> is an artist, writer, and curator living and working in New York. He has contributed text to the <em>Intern<a id="Anker-1196" />ational Journal of Art, Culture, and Design Technologies</em> as well as the Node Center for Curatorial Studies reader, <em>Transversal Curatorial Practices</em>. Wyatt is a contributor to <a href="http://dinca.org">dinca.org</a> and <a href="http://ilikethisart.net">ilikethisart.net</a>, and is the co-founder of Third Party Gallery, a non-profit project space in Cincinnati, Ohio. See, <a href="http://www.wyattniehaus.com">www.wyattniehaus.com</a>. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-10.xhtml" id="patelis">Korinna Patelis</a></strong> has been researching the sociocultural structures of new media for nearly 15 years. She read Philosophy and Politics at Warwick University and has an MA in Media and Communications from Goldsmiths College. Her PhD and early publications concerned the political economy of the internet. In 2009 she joined the Department of Communication and Internet Studies at the Cyprus University of Technology as an assistant professor. Her research interests currently focus on the web’s commercial taxonomy, the representational structures of websites, and the power of social media. </p>
			<p><strong>Miriam Rasch</strong> started working at the Institute of Network Cultures in June 2012. She holds an MA in Literary Studies and Philosophy. After graduating she worked as a (web)editor and programmer for the public lectures department at Utrecht University. She teaches philosophy and media theory at the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences and writes book reviews and guest posts for different websites. Her personal blog can be found on <a href="http://www.miriamrasch.nl">www.miriamrasch.nl</a>. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-6.xhtml" id="rey">PJ Rey</a></strong> is a PhD student in sociology at the University of Maryland, where he is studying social theory with George Ritzer. PJ has written on critical economic issues raised by social media, including new forms of labor and alienation, and the blurring lines between work and play. His dissertation seeks to understand social media through the lens of social geography. He co-founded the <em>Cyborgology</em> blog and the Theorizing the Web conference with Nathan Jurgenson. PJ can be found at @pjrey.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-29.xhtml" id="sevignani">Sebastian Sevignani</a></strong> studied media and communication, philosophy, and theology at the University of Salzburg. In 2007-2010 he worked at the Department of Communication Studies as a scholar in the Media Economics Research Group. In 2010 he became a research associate in the project Social Networking Sites in the Surveillance Society, funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF). His research interests are social theory, Marxism, critical political economy of communications and new information technologies, surveillance, and privacy. Sebastian is a member of the Unified Theory of Information Research Group (UTI) and is on the editorial board of <em>tripleC: Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society</em>.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-3.xhtml" id="stiegler">Bernard Stiegler</a></strong> is a director of IRI (Innovation and Research Institute) at the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris, Professorial Fellow at the Centre for Cultural Studies at Goldsmith College in London, and Professor at the University of Technology of Compiègne where he teaches philosophy. Before taking up the post at the Pompidou Center, he was Program Director at the International College of Philosophy, Deputy Director General of the Institut National de l’Audiovisuel, then Director General at the Institut de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique (IRCAM). His latest books in English are <em>Uncontrollable Societies of Disaffected Individuals</em> (2012) and <em>For a New Critique of Political Economy</em> (2011). </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-25.xhtml" id="stumpel">Marc Stumpel</a></strong> is a new media researcher from Amsterdam. He holds an MA in New Media and Culture from the University of Amsterdam (2010). His main research interest is the antagonism within the political and economic dimensions of digital culture, especially in relation to social media. Being a privacy/user-control advocate, he is concerned with the development of alternative social networking spaces and techniques. He is involved in the Facebook Resistance project as a researcher. His Master’s thesis, ‘The Politics of Social Media’ (2010), focused on control and resistance in relation to Facebook. In 2012 he co-produced the second Unlike Us event.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-27.xhtml" id="terranova">Tiziana Terranova</a></strong> is Associate Professor of Sociology of Communication, Cultural Studies and New media in the Department of Social and Human Sciences, at the Orientale University, Naples, Italy, and director of the PhD program in Cultural and Postcolonial Studies. She is also a member of the free university network Uninomade and author of <em>Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age</em> (Pluto Press: 2004).</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-31.xhtml" id="toubiana">Vincent Toubiana</a></strong> is a research engineer at Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs France where he works on Privacy Preserving Data Analytics and DoNotTrack. He holds a PhD in Computer Networks from Telecom ParisTech. In 2009, he worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher at New York University (NYU) with Professor Helen Nissenbaum where his research focused on web search privacy and privacy preserving behavioral targeting. He illustrated his research results by developing several browser extensions.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-23.xhtml" id="troemel">Brad Troemel</a></strong> is an American artist, writer, and instructor based in New York.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-28.xhtml" id="velden">Lonneke van der Velden</a></strong> is a PhD student at the Amsterdam School for Cultural Analysis (ASCA) and teaches at the department of Media Studies (University of Amsterdam). Her PhD research focuses on digital surveillance and technologies of activism. She currently explores how to do internet studies using digital methods with a an emphasis on social networking platforms.</p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-7.xhtml" id="warnke">Martin Warnke</a></strong> studied in Berlin and Hamburg, acquired his PhD in theoretical physics, and was head of the computing and media center at the University of Lüneburg for many years. In 2008 he became an associate professor for digital media/cultural computer science, and is currently the university’s Director of the Institute for Culture and Aesthetics of Digital Media at the Faculty of Culture. He is also a visiting professor in Vienna, Klagenfurt, and Basel, and works in the fields of history, digital media, and the digital documentation of complex works of art. </p>
			<p><strong><a href="unlike-us-reader-16.xhtml" id="wittkower">D.E. Wittkower</a></strong> is an assistant professor of philosophy at Old Dominion University. His work concentrates on aspects of digital culture – such as friendship and self-identity on social networking sites – and has also worked on other aspects of the philosophy of technology and philosophy of culture, on topics such as Philip K. Dick, the iPod, employee loyalty, the role of the cute online, copyright, audiobooks, and the Occupy Wall Street movement.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
