<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>unlike-us-reader-11</title>
		<link href="css/unlike-us-reader.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="unlike-us-reader" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<h1 id="toc_marker-10" class="article-title"><a id="Rhetorics-of-Sharing---Data--Imagination---and-Desire" />Rhetorics of Sharing: Data, Imagination, and Desire</h1>
			<p class="slash">/</p>
			<h2 class="author-name"><a href="unlike-us-reader-34.xhtml#kennedy">5521438321</a></h2>
		</div>
		<div>
			<p class="quote_no-space-after"><em>Whether across the world or across the street, Twitter – and more broadly, technology – allows people to view the world through each other’s eyes. As a result, we are able to share information and communicate more easily than any time in our past, bringing the world closer</em>.</p>
			<p class="quote">– Abdur Chowdhury<sup><a id="footnote-300305-1-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-1">1</a></sup></p>
			<p class="quote_no-space-after"><em>If you like something it is automatically shared with all your friends to say “this person liked this you should like it as well” so they are definitely like, directing you in which ways to share stuff... So I think like, I do “like” this but do I “like” it enough to tell the whole world that I “like” it because when people look at it they going to think “oh she must love this brand” because she has “liked” it on Facebook whereas I might not actually like it that much</em>.</p>
			<p class="quote">– Esel<sup><a id="footnote-300305-2-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-2">2</a></sup></p>
			<p class="quote_no-space-after"><em>We get all the culture; they get all the revenue</em>.</p>
			<p class="quote">– McKenzie Wark<sup><a id="footnote-300305-3-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-3">3</a></sup></p>
			<p>On 31 October 2006 Chris Hughes, then project manager for the newly developed share functionality of Facebook, wrote in one of the first entries on the public blog:</p>
			<p class="quote">Starting today, there are links to share on Facebook planted all across the Internet, from the articles at Time to the videos at Photobucket. Look for links like this all over the Web, making it easy for you to share.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-4-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-4">4</a></sup></p>
			<p>Hughes, a founding member of Facebook, and known as ‘the empath’ in Facebook circles for his intuition of users rather than code, saw the social network as an opportunity to help people share information most efficiently.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-5-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-5">5</a></sup> The timing of his announcement is significant: share buttons would from then on proliferate in online content and apps. While it was a watershed moment, the spreading of share rhetoric in social media platforms had been building for some years and Hughes’ post in 2006 was in the midst of the adoption period of this terminology.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-6-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-6">6</a></sup></p>
			<p>More significant than the timing of this rhetorical development, is the <em>framing</em> of the sharing rhetoric. Hughes’ only other Facebook blog post (he would leave Facebook in January 2007 to take on the online organization of supporters for Barack Obama’s presidential campaign) is a pun on the maxim ‘sharing is caring’. He draws on social sensibilities of goodwill by evoking the imagined memory of a school teacher’s lesson when he comments ‘as a mark of due respect to all the kindergarten teachers of the world, go forth and share’ while emphasizing the boldness (and newness) of it all in the provocation of a dare through the post’s heading ‘Sharing is Daring’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-7-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-7">7</a></sup></p>
			<p>In digital contexts the use of the term sharing is strategic; it has social, economic, cultural, and political resonance. Cultural intermediaries, especially social media platforms, are able to utilize this semantic richness to construct a rhetoric of sharing based upon their own specific agendas. Sharing is never employed neutrally. Furthermore, the semantic richness of the term often belies tensions of competing rhetorics of sharing in digital contexts.</p>
			<p>In the second opening quotation of this text, Esel, a social media user, highlights the complex, subjective labor of sharing.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-8-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-8">8</a></sup> There is a stark contradiction between Esel’s statement where she identifies possible interpretations of her sharing practices and the hyperbolic statement from the Twitter blog in which sharing brings ‘the world closer’ and makes communication ‘easy’.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">The Imaginary of Sharing</h3>
			<p>Manuel Castells states: ‘In our society, the protocols of communication are not based on the sharing of culture, but on the <em>culture of sharing</em>’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-9-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-9">9</a></sup> Sharing is a regular exhortation in the social web. The mobilization of this term is not accidental or ingenuous but is strategically harnessed and massaged by cultural intermediaries such as social media platforms. Most, if not all, social media platforms feature the function to ‘share’. These functions of sharing are discursively framed as practices of socializing, networking, or navigating.</p>
			<p>Social media platforms are central players in the framing of sharing. Though they are not the only cultural intermediaries to construct and mobilize a cultural imagining of sharing, much of the debate around the immaterial labor of sharing focuses on these entities which points to their centrality in the development and drive of sharing rhetoric.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-10-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-10">10</a></sup></p>
			<p>Sharing is not used innocently in echo of a childhood motto, it is carefully constructed. As a rhetorical strategy it is political. Social media platforms use the rhetoric of sharing to establish their function as facilitators of social engagement. Here are some typical assertions: ‘Facebook helps you connect and share with the people in your life’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-11-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-11">11</a></sup> ‘Find out what’s happening, right now, with the people and organizations you care about’ says Twitter.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-12-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-12">12</a></sup> ‘Share your life in photos’ invites Flickr, ‘Keep up with your friends and share your stories with comments &amp; notes’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-13-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-13">13</a></sup> YouTube, likewise, is situated as a facilitator of social relationships, offering through their iPhone app ‘more ways to share with the people you love’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-14-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-14">14</a></sup> Social media platforms employ the term sharing by using its association to predated activities, claiming to better enable such sharing by buying into existing vernacular yet paradoxically also masking the idea that it was ever possible to do any form of sharing before their existence.</p>
			<p>Sharing rhetoric draws on a cultural image of connectivity. Social media platforms are not the only actors to use such imagining, mobile-based platforms do the same. Network providers, handset manufacturers, and social media platforms each promote social activities of togetherness enabled by their products which evidences a sustained cultural norm of sharing through teletechnologies for the purpose of affective connectivity.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Good Subjects Share</h3>
			<p>In 2010 Mark Zuckerberg further emphasized the framing of sharing as affective connectivity, stating in one of his own posts on <em>The Facebook Blog</em>:</p>
			<p class="quote">When we started Facebook, we built it around a few simple ideas. People want to share and stay connected with their friends and the people around them. When you have control over what you share, you want to share more. When you share more, the world becomes more open and connected.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-15-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-15">15</a></sup></p>
			<p>Continuing the framing established by Hughes, Zuckerberg structures sharing as positive, ‘open’ communication and ‘connected’ sociability. It is markedly similar to the Twitter statement which also exaggerates the role the platform plays in bringing people together. Social media platforms heavily utilize this ‘open’ and ‘connected’ structuring of meaning. The parlance of sharing is purposively harnessed as a way of initiating familiarization with the practices digital intermediaries afford – socializing with friends and loved ones, networking with others over shared concerns, and navigating stories from around the world.</p>
			<p>Public press would have us believe that anyone not willing to share their mundane day-to-day business on a prime social media platform is a heinous monster likely to commit mass homicide.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-16-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-16">16</a></sup> Using social media platforms is equated with being a valid member of society, such that newspaper journalist Catherine Bennett stated ‘Facebook use is now considered so overwhelmingly the norm that employers are more likely than not to consider documented history of online poking, boasting and friending to be a comforting sign of socialisation and professionalism’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-17-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-17">17</a></sup> These platforms operate as cultural intermediaries and, as such, are power structures able to construct digital subjects where being a good neoliberal subject means sharing through socialization, networking, and navigating. Good subjects post, update, like, tweet, retweet, and most importantly, <em>share</em>.</p>
			<p>Social integration is equated with connecting and sharing, therefore ‘quitting’ a social media platform is likened to ending a relationship. The ability to communicate, to share with others, will be incomprehensibly lost if you leave – though your data remains intact should you choose to come back. The assumption being that your social integration relies on you being present on the platform. Another journalist for <em>The Guardian</em>, says that ‘“unfriending” someone on Facebook [...] feels like delivering a slap in the face (and not even a well-timed slap, since you can’t be sure when they’ll find out)’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-18-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-18">18</a></sup> And tellingly, goes on to say ‘Facebook itself hates unfriending, for commercial reasons, and thus makes it easy to hide updates from tiresome contacts without their knowing’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-19-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-19">19</a></sup> The social media platform prefers you to share with as many others as possible. Greater connections mean wider sharing with further opportunities to generate <em>data</em>.</p>
			<p>Data is gold. The data generated by sharing is part of what The World Economic Forum call an emerging ‘asset class’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-20-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-20">20</a></sup> Facebook claim they have ‘never sold and will never sell user information’,<sup><a id="footnote-300305-21-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-21">21</a></sup> because they don’t have to. Why would they sell that data and the power that goes with moderating access to that data to another party? Facebook, Google, and their ilk’s value comes in owning user data not in selling it. Being in the business of gathering data, a sound plan is to grow the breadth and scale of that data. Sharing is the engine of data.</p>
			<p>So what is sharing? Yochai Benkler frames sharing as something that is done ‘nicely’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-22-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-22">22</a></sup> Charles Leadbetter states ‘you are what you share’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-23-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-23">23</a></sup> Sharing is being in common, an economic function and a political behavior. The scope within definitions of sharing for social, cultural, economical, and political application is, in part, what makes the language of sharing so useful to these digital actors as a rhetorical strategy. As a social facilitator they emphasize sharing for social ‘good’, as a cultural mediator they emphasize being in common through sharing on their platforms. Their economic stature is evidenced in their distinction of user-generated value through sharing metrics and their political stature in the attainment of user-generated economic power, though the political and economic stature through user-generated value is deliberately underplayed.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">The Symbolic and the Strategic</h3>
			<p>Tim Berners-Lee said of the early internet: ‘The dream behind the Web is of a common information space in which we communicate by sharing information’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-24-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-24">24</a></sup> The incitement to share is as much a part of the discourse of the culture of the web as it is a part of the infrastructure. Principles of Web 2.0 rhetoric are centered around participatory practices such as information distribution, inter-operability between interfaces and systems, and user-centered design which optimizes design choices around the end user’s perceived needs and desires. Essential to this rhetoric are attributes of openness, freedom for users to participate, and collective intelligence.</p>
			<p>Social media platforms explicitly and strategically position sharing within a culture of participation, they position themselves as enabling this sharing for the purpose of community development, engagement, and creativity. Tensions exist between the statements of these sites and the expectations of the users. As curators of publicly generated content, these providers also shape what content exists. They curate not only content but the <em>discourses around that content</em>.</p>
			<p>Social media platforms establish a particular discourse that frames their purpose for being, their relationship with their users, and negotiates the tensions between their relationship with their users and their customers or commercial parties. Within YouTube, there are shared ways of doing, seeing, and being. Users upload their own videos, view, and respond by commenting on others or producing new content that in turn generates community and dialogue. YouTube has a complicated position as both a distribution service for commercial entities and a community generator.</p>
			<p>By establishing themselves as intermediaries these corporations downplay their economic power and cloak their political momentum by capitalizing on the notion of being supportive entities, with the implication that they do not control the practices contained within their sites. Mayo Fuster Morrell uses the term ‘wikiwashing’ to describe such actions.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-25-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-25">25</a></sup> Wikiwashing is the appropriation of values associated with wikis – collaboration, openness, non-profit. It is a systematic misrepresentation process that seeks to afford the values of wikis to commercial enterprises. The Facebook home screen when it was launched in 2004 (then called Thefacebook) featured the text ‘A Mark Zuckerburg Production Thefacebook © 2004’, a clear identification of proprietary control. As it stands today, the copyright line is simply ‘Facebook © 2012’. The corporate identity and tool are collapsed under the same branding.</p>
			<p>What is omitted or ignored in this framing? As previously stated, the term sharing is utilized within this collapsed facade to leverage semantics of neutrality. The use of such language focused towards users in direct appeal through information architecture and tag lines implies access and open neutrality through a benign host. However, many of these sites are funded by advertising and the sale of content traffic, as is the case with YouTube.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-26-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-26">26</a></sup> The precision of selective language is paramount in the negotiation of these complex relationships. In the same way that Tarleton Gillespie argues ‘platform’ is harnessed as a key term, so too is the term ‘sharing’:</p>
			<p class="quote">A term like “platform” does not drop from the sky, or emerge in some organic, unfettered way from public discussion. It is drawn from the available cultural vocabulary by stakeholders with specific aims, and carefully massaged so as to have particular resonance for particular audiences inside particular discourses.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-27-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-27">27</a></sup> </p>
			<p>Replace the term ‘platform’ with ‘sharing’ and the argument is equally pertinent. Discursive positioning of online activity through tropes such as platform and sharing ‘depends on terms and ideas that are specific enough to mean something, and vague enough to work across multiple venues for multiple audiences’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-28-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-28">28</a></sup> This is why the word sharing is able to be utilized across different discourses, by distinct groups, each with particular agendas.</p>
			<p>Sharing is a political construct. Sharing content raises questions about the ‘ownership’ of that content which points to the fact that while the internet may be built within a cohesive technological framework, there are distinct (political) divisions within sites between policies for users, providers, and data handlers. Social media platforms mediate between users and between advertisers and traffic. This makes social media platforms distinct from other social web platforms such as non-profit collaborative wikis and open source initiatives such as Linux. As Tarleton Gillespie argues, important political issues get rewritten as technocratic, whereby the political becomes invisible in light of the technological.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-29-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-29">29</a></sup> By emphasizing the social affordances of the platform (helping you to ‘connect’, ‘keep up’, and ‘view the world through each other’s eyes’), the politics of data handling, ownership, and monetization are hidden from view. Sharing is (after all) political.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Conflicting Sharing Rhetorics</h3>
			<p>Multiple, conflicting rhetorics of sharing resonate through network society culture. Jessica Litman positions sharing as a form of ‘anarchic volunteerism’ where ‘untamed’ sharing of digital information, files, and communication is more effective than paid subscriptions or hard copy distribution.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-30-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-30">30</a></sup> In ‘hive-minded’ gift economies resources are exchanged through unspecified obligations with an expectation of satisfaction in participation.</p>
			<p>There is a limit to the utility of this rhetoric of sharing. Sharing applies only to the distribution of specific objects. Litman says: ‘Collecting information on the Internet is “learning”. Posting information on the net is “sharing”. Try exactly the same thing with recorded music and it is “stealing”’.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-31-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-31">31</a></sup> The ‘sharing’ is troubled by the statement of ‘property’ upon which intense debates persist. To some sharing is a litigious term synonymous with ‘stealing’, to others it is its imprecise and inappropriate association to tangibility that is the issue.</p>
			<p><em>Sharing, stealing, copying</em>. Each term conveys a specific set of principles and values, yet stealing and copying are critical points of departure from sharing. The practices they describe are essentially the redistribution of material or immaterial objects and rights to exclusivity. Sharing and stealing of material objects imply reductive qualities in redistribution. Exclusivity is diminished in distribution and limited by the minimum unit of division. Copying of material objects has implications of scale. Exclusivity is also diminished in distribution, though the nature of the copy means that the exclusivity of the original remains intact. Sharing, stealing, and copying each have implications of scale for immaterial objects. Exclusivity is potentially irrelevant, the original risks becoming obsolete. Sharing, stealing, and copying are distinguishable by the terms and ownership of control over the scale and exclusiveness of distribution. Sharing is a relinquishing of control, which may be partial. Stealing is a forceful shift in ownership of control. Copying is a giving up of control of distribution where ownership of the original remains intact, though the original may no longer be identifiable or worthy of distinction.</p>
			<p>In discussions on peer-to-peer file sharing, Matthew David argues that through the synonymity of sharing, copying, and stealing, the act of sharing has been criminalized.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-32-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-32">32</a></sup> Scarcity is threatened by sharing, and so modes of frictionless distribution are framed as unlawful and criminal to protect those whose interests are best served by scarcity regardless of whether or not the threat is justified. Networked devices and individuals problematize the notion of scarcity where it refers to digital or informational goods. The distributed systems of file sharing distance the software provider from user interactions and infringed or digitally managed files. Property, rights, and ownership discourses challenge the monopoly of media conglomerations and so the acts of providing, uploading, or downloading controlled media files or even providing the software or service infrastructure for these acts are framed as criminal acts. The networking of these systems of distribution, themselves increasingly distributed so that a particular entity is not identifiable or connectable to a particular act or file is partly in response to this criminalization discourse. The criminalization of peer-to-peer sharing can be read then as a criminalization of culture.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-33-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-33">33</a></sup></p>
			<p>Furthermore, peer-to-peer advocate groups attempt to push back against the criminalization of culture by reclaiming the rhetoric of sharing, through their ‘sharing is caring’ slogans. In much the same way that social media platforms have an interest in framing specific practices as sharing, so too do peer-to-peer and file sharing advocates. By emphasizing the ubiquity of these practices and situating them within the continuum of user-generated content they reframe file sharing practices as normative rather than illegal behavior, implying that the legal system which seeks to limit them is out of date rather than the practices which are out of line. Such a social framing of sharing was successfully leveraged recently in a copyright infringement case in Portugal when a judge declared file sharing for personal use to be legal.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-34-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-34">34</a></sup></p>
			<p>Creative Commons also purports to popularize sharing. A formalization of social practice, Creative Commons shows the limits of territorial and philosophical presuppositions and the ephemerality of property rights. John Palfrey and Urs Gasser argue that the ‘norms of sharing’ are immersed in creative modes of interaction and production which includes illegal downloading and viewing that threaten the legalities of ownership and copyright and counterposes creativity with copyright law.<sup><a id="footnote-300305-35-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-300305-35">35</a></sup> There is ambivalence between users as to what constitutes creative use and what amounts to copyright infringement.</p>
			<p>These latter examples demonstrate that practices of semantic leveraging are key within digital contexts, that it is not just social media platforms and cultural intermediaries that do this work.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Raising Consciousness to Rhetorical Constructions</h3>
			<p>The ubiquity and everydayness of the term sharing belies the diverse and complex social, cultural, economic, and political processes it is employed to describe. There are popular and critical contexts for the term’s use in teletechnology and internet rhetoric. The ambiguity around the term sharing hides tensions between competing expectations. Social media platforms, in particular, utilize these discourses of sharing to obscure a proprietary control of data and labor such that sharing is used as a rhetorical neutralizer between those that generate data in providing content to social media platforms (users), those that ‘own’ such data (platforms), and those that access and make use of it (advertisers and data handlers).</p>
			<p class="text-last">‘Sharing’ on social media platforms may pay lip service to the sharing learned as kindergarten children but the private monetization of data behind closed doors marks a stark contradiction. The hyperbolic rhetoric of sharing demands rigorous examination to understand what is prioritized and what is omitted, effaced, or ignored.</p>
			<h6 class="references_title">References</h6>
			<p class="references">Allen, Matthew. ‘Web 2.0: An Argument Against Convergence’, <em>First Monday </em>13.3 (2008), <a href="http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2139/1946">http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2139/1946</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Benkler, Yochai. ‘‘‘Sharing Nicely”: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production’, <em>The Yale Law Journal</em> 114 (2004): 273-358.</p>
			<p class="references">Bennett, Catherine. ‘Not on Facebook? What Kind of Sad Sicko Are You?’, <em>The Guardian</em>, 12 August, 2012, <a href="http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/aug/12/catherine-bennett-facebook-psycopaths">http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/aug/12/catherine-bennett-facebook-psycopaths</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Berners-Lee, Tim and Mark Fischetti. <em>Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor</em>, San Francisco: Harper, 1999.</p>
			<p class="references">Burkeman, Oliver. ‘Facebook and Twitter: The Art of Unfriending or Unfollowing People’, <em>The Guardian</em>, 14 September 2012, <a href="http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/sep/14/unfollow-unfriend-on-facebook-twitter?CMP=twt_fd">http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/sep/14/unfollow-unfriend-on-facebook-twitter?CMP=twt_fd</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Castells, Manuel. <em>Communication Power</em>, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.</p>
			<p class="references">Chowdhury, Abdur. ‘Global Pulse’, Twitter weblog, 29 June 2011, <a href="http://blog.twitter.com/2011/06/global-pulse.html">http://blog.twitter.com/2011/06/global-pulse.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">David, Matthew. <em>Peer to Peer and the Music Industry: The Criminalization of Sharing</em>, London: Sage Publications Limited, 2010.</p>
			<p class="references">Doronichev, Andrey. ‘Introducing a New YouTube App for Your iPhone and iPod Touch’, YouTube weblog, 11 September 2012, <a href="http://youtube-global.blogspot.com.au/2012/09/introducing-new-youtube-app-for-your.html">http://youtube-global.blogspot.com.au/2012/09/introducing-new-youtube-app-for-your.html</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Ernesto. ‘File-Sharing for Personal Use Declared Legal in Portugal’, TorrentFreak, 27 September 2012, <a href="http://torrentfreak.com/file-sharing-for-personal-use-declared-legal-in-portugal-120927/">http://torrentfreak.com/file-sharing-for-personal-use-declared-legal-in-portugal-120927/</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Gillespie, Tarleton. <em>Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Culture</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.</p>
			<p class="references">______.‘The Politics of ‘Platforms’’, <em>New Media Society</em> 12.3 (2010): 347-364.</p>
			<p class="references">Hughes, Chris. ‘Sharing is Daring’, The Facebook Blog, 27 October 2006, <a href="http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2214737130">http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2214737130</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">______. ‘Share is Everywhere’, The Facebook Blog, 31 October 2006, <a href="http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2215537130">http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2215537130</a>.</p>
			<p class="references"> Hurley, Chad. ‘YouTube CEO Chad Hurley’s MIPCOM keynote address’, 15 October 2008, <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXMPaQQ6y4A">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXMPaQQ6y4A</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">John, Nicholas. ‘Sharing and Web 2.0: The Emergence of a Keyword’, <em>New Media Society</em> (2012), <a href="http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/07/03/1461444812450684">http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/07/03/1461444812450684</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Leadbeater, Charles. <em>We-think: Mass Innovation not Mass Production: The Power of Mass Creativity</em>, London: Profile Books, 2008.</p>
			<p class="references">Litman, Jessica. ‘Sharing and Stealing’, <em>Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journa</em>l 27 (2004).</p>
			<p class="references">McGirt, Ellen. ‘How Chris Hughes Helped Launch Facebook and the Barack Obama Campaign’, <em>Fast Company</em>, 1 April 2009, <a href="http://www.fastcompany.com/1207594/how-chris-hughes-helped-launch-facebook-and-barack-obama-campaign">http://www.fastcompany.com/1207594/how-chris-hughes-helped-launch-facebook-and-barack-obama-campaign</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Morell, Mayo Fuster. ‘The Unethics of Sharing: Wikiwashing’, <em>International Review of Information Ethics</em> 15.9 (2011), <a href="http://www.i-r-i-e.net/inhalt/015/015-Morell.pdf">http://www.i-r-i-e.net/inhalt/015/015-Morell.pdf</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Palfrey, John and Urs Gasser. <em>Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives</em>, Phoenix, Arizona: Basic Books, 2008.</p>
			<p class="references">Scholz, Trebor (ed.) <em>Digital Labour: The Internet as Playground and Factory</em>, New York and London: Routledge, 2012.</p>
			<p class="references">Vernal, Mike. ‘An Update on Facebook UIDs’, Facebook Developers weblog, 31 October 2010, <a href="http://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/422/">http://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/422/</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Wark, McKenzie.‘Considerations of a Hacker Manifesto’, in Trebor Scholz (ed.) <em>Digital Labour: The Internet as Playground and Factory</em>, New York and London: Routledge, 2012, pp. 69-76.</p>
			<p class="references">World Economic Forum. <em>Personal Data: The Emergence of a New Asset Class</em>, Geneva, 2011, <a href="http://www.weforum.org/reports/personal-data-emergence-new-asset-class">http://www.weforum.org/reports/personal-data-emergence-new-asset-class</a>.</p>
			<p class="references-last">Zuckerberg, Mark. ‘Making Control Simple’, The Facebook Blog, 27 May 2010, <a href="http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=391922327130">http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=391922327130</a>.</p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h6 class="references_title">Notes</h6>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-1" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-1-backlink">1</a>.&#9;Abdur Chowdhury, ‘Global Pulse’, Twitter weblog, 29 June 2011, <a href="http://blog.twitter.com/2011/06/global-pulse.html">http://blog.twitter.com/2011/06/global-pulse.html</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-2" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-2-backlink">2</a>.&#9;Esel, interview transcript, 2012. Esel is a pseudonym. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-3" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-3-backlink">3</a>.&#9;McKenzie Wark, ‘Considerations of a Hacker Manifesto’, in Trebor Scholz (ed.) <em>Digital Labour: The Internet as Playground and Factory,</em> New York and London: Routledge, 2012.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-4" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-4-backlink">4</a>.&#9;Chris Hughes, ‘Share is Everywhere’, The Facebook Blog, 31 October 2006, <a href="http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2215537130">http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2215537130</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-5" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-5-backlink">5</a>.&#9;Ellen McGirt, ‘How Chris Hughes Helped Launch Facebook and the Barack Obama Campaign’, <em>Fast Company</em>, 1 April 2009, <a href="http://www.fastcompany.com/1207594/how-chris-hughes-helped-launch-facebook-and-barack-obama-campaign">http://www.fastcompany.com/1207594/how-chris-hughes-helped-launch-facebook-and-barack-obama-campaign</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-6" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-6-backlink">6</a>.&#9;Nicholas John, ‘Sharing and Web 2.0: The Emergence of a Keyword’, <em>New Media Society</em> (2012), <a href="http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/07/03/1461444812450684">http://nms.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/07/03/1461444812450684</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-7" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-7-backlink">7</a>.&#9;Chris Hughes, ‘Sharing is Daring’, The Facebook Blog, 27 October 2006, <a href="http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2214737130">http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=2214737130</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-8" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-8-backlink">8</a>.&#9;I tease out sharing as a complex media practice as part of my PhD work on selective sharing practices in networked spaces. I examine the development of sharing rhetoric in digital contexts as well as the perceptions and experiences of those engaging in sharing practices in networked spaces through multiple qualitative methods. Esel’s quote is extracted from the transcript of one of the many interviews I conducted between 2011 and 2012.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-9" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-9-backlink">9</a>.&#9;Manuel Castells, <em>Communication Power</em>, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 126. Emphasis added.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-10" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-10-backlink">10</a>.&#9;Trebor Scholz (ed.) <em>Digital Labour: The Internet as Playground and Factory</em>, New York and London: Routledge, 2012.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-11" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-11-backlink">11</a>.&#9;Facebook, <a href="http://www.facebook.com">www.facebook.com</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-12" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-12-backlink">12</a>.&#9;Twitter, <a href="http://www.twitter.com">www.twitter.com</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-13" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-13-backlink">13</a>.&#9;Flickr, <a href="http://www.flickr.com">www.flickr.com</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-14" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-14-backlink">14</a>.&#9;Andrey Doronichev, ‘Introducing a New YouTube App for your iPhone and iPod Touch’, YouTube weblog, 11 September 2012, <a href="http://youtube-global.blogspot.com.au/2012/09/introducing-new-youtube-app-for-your.html">http://youtube-global.blogspot.com.au/2012/09/introducing-new-youtube-app-for-your.html</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-15" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-15-backlink">15</a>.&#9;Mark Zuckerberg, ‘Making Control Simple’, The Facebook Blog, 27 May 2010, <a href="http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=391922327130">http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=391922327130</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-16" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-16-backlink">16</a>.&#9;Catherine Bennett, ‘Not on Facebook? What Kind of Sad Sicko Are You?’, <em>The Guardian</em>, 12 August 2012, <a href="http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/aug/12/catherine-bennett-facebook-psycopaths">http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/aug/12/catherine-bennett-facebook-psycopaths</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-17" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-17-backlink">17</a>.&#9;Bennett, ‘Not on Facebook?’</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-18" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-18-backlink">18</a>.&#9;Oliver Burkeman, ‘Facebook and Twitter: The Art of Unfriending or Unfollowing People’, <em>The Guardian</em>, 14 September 2012, <a href="http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/sep/14/unfollow-unfriend-on-facebook-twitter?CMP=twt_fd">http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/sep/14/unfollow-unfriend-on-facebook-twitter?CMP=twt_fd</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-19" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-19-backlink">19</a>.&#9;Burkeman, ‘Facebook and Twitter’. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-20" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-20-backlink">20</a>.&#9;World Economic Forum, <em>Personal Data: The Emergence of a New Asset Class</em>, Geneva, 2011, <a href="http://www.weforum.org/reports/personal-data-emergence-new-asset-class">http://www.weforum.org/reports/personal-data-emergence-new-asset-class</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-21" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-21-backlink">21</a>.&#9;Mike Vernal, ‘An Update on Facebook UIDs’, Facebook Developers weblog, 31 October 2010, <a href="http://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/422/">http://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/422/</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-22" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-22-backlink">22</a>.&#9;Yochai Benkler, ‘‘‘Sharing Nicely”: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality of Economic Production’, <em>The Yale Law Journal</em> 114 (2004).</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-23" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-23-backlink">23</a>.&#9;Charles Leadbeater, <em>We-Think: Mass innovation Not Mass Production: The Power of Mass Creativity</em>, London: Profile Books, 2008.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-24" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-24-backlink">24</a>.&#9;Tim Berners-Lee and Mark Fischetti, <em>Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor</em><em>, </em>San Francisco: Harper, 1999.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-25" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-25-backlink">25</a>.&#9;Mayo Fuster Morell, ‘The Unethics of Sharing: Wikiwashing’, <em>International Review of Information Ethics</em> 15.9 (2011), <a href="http://www.i-r-i-e.net/inhalt/015/015-Morell.pdf">http://www.i-r-i-e.net/inhalt/015/015-Morell.pdf</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-26" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-26-backlink">26</a>.&#9;Matthew Allen, ‘Web 2.0: An Argument Against Convergence’, <em>First Monday</em> 13.3 (2008), <a href="http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2139/1946">http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/2139/1946</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-27" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-27-backlink">27</a>.&#9;Tarleton Gillespie, ‘The Politics of “Platforms’’’, <em>New Media Society</em> 12.3 (2010), p. 359.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-28" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-28-backlink">28</a>.&#9;Gillespie, ‘The Politics of “Platforms’’’, p. 359.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-29" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-29-backlink">29</a>.&#9;Tarleton Gillespie, <em>Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Culture</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007, pp. 82-83.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-30" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-30-backlink">30</a>.&#9;Jessica Litman, ‘Sharing and Stealing’, <em>Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal</em> 27 (2004): 4.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-31" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-31-backlink">31</a>.&#9;Litman, ‘Sharing and Stealing’, p. 23.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-32" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-32-backlink">32</a>.&#9;Matthew David, <em>Peer to Peer and the Music Industry: The Criminalization of Sharing</em>, London: Sage Publications Limited, 2010.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-33" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-33-backlink">33</a>.&#9;Matthew, <em>Peer to Peer and the Music Industry</em>, p. 9.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-34" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-34-backlink">34</a>.&#9;Ernesto, ‘File-Sharing for Personal Use Declared Legal in Portugal’, TorrentFreak, 27 September 2012, <a href="http://torrentfreak.com/file-sharing-for-personal-use-declared-legal-in-portugal-120927/">http://torrentfreak.com/file-sharing-for-personal-use-declared-legal-in-portugal-120927/</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-300305-35" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-300305-35-backlink">35</a>.&#9;John Palfrey and Urs Gasser, <em>Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives</em>, Phoenix, Arizona: Basic Books, 2008, p. 138.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
		
<script type="text/javascript">
<![CDATA[
if (document) {
	// texte sans les tags
	textdata = document.body.innerText;
	
	// pattern : mot 'share' + le mot qui le suit, recherche globale, ne fait pas de différence entre majuscule et manuscule
	var patt = /(?:share\s)(\w+)/gi;
	
	// boucle, recherche de toutes les occurences du mot 'share'
	while (null != (result = patt.exec (textdata))) {
		
		// on affecte à la variable 'keyWord2' le terme qui suit le mot 'share' (ex. information, ...), provenant du résultat
		var keyWord2 = result[1];

		// pattern 2 : terme qui suit le mot 'share' suivit des 100 prochains caractères
		var patt2 = new RegExp ('(?:' + keyWord2 + ')(.{0,100})', 'gi');
		
		// recherche de toutes les occurences des mots suivants le mot 'share'
		var result2 = patt2.exec (textdata)

		// transforme le résultat en String
		var resultText = result2.toString();

		// texte avec les tags
		var textWithTags = document.body.innerHTML;

		// remplace le terme suivant le mot 'share' par les 100 nouveaux caractères
		//var res = textWithTags.replace(keyWord2,'<span class="shareWord">'+resultText+'</span>');
		var keywordPatt = new RegExp ('share ' + keyWord2, "gi");
		var res = textWithTags.replace(keywordPatt,'share <span class="shareWord">'+resultText+'</span>');

		document.body.innerHTML = res;
	}

}
		]]>
		</script>
	</body>
</html>
