<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title>unlike-us-reader-10</title>
		<link href="css/unlike-us-reader.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>
	<body id="unlike-us-reader" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<div>
			<h1 id="toc_marker-9" class="article-title"><a id="Political-Economy-and--Monopoly-Abstractions---What-Social-Media-Demand" />Political Economy and Monopoly Abstractions: What Social Media Demand</h1>
			<p class="slash">/</p>
			<h2 class="author-name"><a href="unlike-us-reader-34.xhtml#patelis">23249990</a></h2>
		</div>
		<div>
			<p class="quote_no-space-after"><em>Our goal is not to build a platform. It’s to be across all of them.</em> </p>
			<p class="quote">– Mark Zuckerberg<sup><a id="footnote-299855-1-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-1">1</a></sup></p>
			<p>The past decade has seen a staggering increase in the use of online services known as ‘social media’, a term coined to describe that these services ‘enable’ social interaction amongst users. Social media forms the core of the web in terms of use by westerners. Like most media in Western democracies, social media are private companies. Their successful operation in the last half-decade has formed an oligopoly market, with Facebook leading the way. This means that for many, particularly new internet users, social media are ‘the internet’, and for many of these, Facebook <em>is</em> social media.</p>
			<p>The commercial nature, as well as the oligopoly structure of the social media market, is to an extent the unfortunate consequence of the way capitalist democracies have designed their media. In having been developed by corporate capitalism, social media have a congenitally double nature: on the one hand they are the loci of fulfillment of communications that are central to the functioning of democracy, indeed, for society as a whole; while on the other hand, they must realize profits. In the words of Zuckerberg himself in the Initial Public Offering (IPO) letter to Facebook investors in 2012: ‘Facebook was not originally created to be a company. It was built to accomplish a social mission – to make the world more open and connected’.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-2-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-2">2</a></sup></p>
			<p>This is the paradoxical nature of the function of media in liberal Western democracies.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-3-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-3">3</a></sup> In other words, as is the case with traditional media, so too social media on the web have not been developed to carry out certain functions for society. No one devised them in order to have a social role, but rather, they have developed within the scope of a globally deregulated field of communications and they are commercial media by design. The dramatic irony of this design is that social media are supposed to remain free from state intervention, but this makes them vulnerable to financial power. In other words, commercial media in a deregulated arena are bound to produce monopolies like Facebook. This is how capitalism works. </p>
			<p>Facing the tale of monopoly software such as Facebook, this article narrates a different story full of paradoxes central to the way capitalism works. It tells the story of capitalist software, focusing on the plots and heroes of such software with the antinomies of capitalism from a somewhat different perspective than customary in critical approaches. This storytelling is polemic – in the sense that it aims to trigger disputes concerning the mo<a id="Anker-1189" />nopoly nature of new media, and their relationship to user culture. In other words, the interesting story told by social media is the one you, me, and billions of other people stare at day after day on our screens, and how this relates to capitalism. So I focus on the mundane, the less attractive pole of the contradictions of the World Wide Web, where daily, one comes across ever-increasing commercialization, structuration, and monopolization. The popular, mass side of this media, is needed to understand, in-depth, the role of social media in its making. Social media are drivers in key industrial processes: the process of transforming communications into a fragmented, commercialized pool of personal data. When this process comes to an end, in a couple of years, it will have structurally transformed commercial media forever. This is because commercial media will no longer be funded by advertising, but will be funded through commercialized private data. Instead of providing audience views to advertisers in exchange for money, social media can now sell the actual personal data of such viewers directly to the companies in question.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-4-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-4">4</a></sup> I don’t mean to imply that an analysis of the internet must always revolve around its political economy. Rather, what is of interest here is to further conceptualize the mass element of the internet. </p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Social Media as Social Text</h3>
			<p>Interest in social media is methodologically somewhat undefined, particularly at a time were ‘affect’ seems to saturate the academy. In new media journals, the ‘text’ as an analytical category is almost nonexistent having faced multiple methodological challenges, the most obvious of which is the idea of the ‘active user’ and of interactivity being automatically attributed to the use of new media. Unlike approaches that centre on the ‘affect’ of new media, my attention here is towards software and the interface it produces as a basic axis for understanding representational structures on the web. This focus on software is an element that we adopt from so-called ‘software studies’, which among other things considers software to be central in understanding the ‘language of new media’.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-5-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-5">5</a></sup></p>
			<p>Moreover, software simultaneously constitutes<sup><a id="footnote-299855-6-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-6">6</a></sup> both a social text as well as a consumed product. Thus, the interface and the software are cultural texts, i.e. a systematically organized set of discourses, and simultaneously consumer products whose conditions of production and distribution are important.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-7-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-7">7</a></sup> This means that Facebook software cannot be anything other than partial, cannot have been developed other than on the basis of specific values and with the aim of specified interaction. Facebook software, therefore, constitutes a field of political choice, not of ‘transparency’.</p>
			<p>Because I do political economy what is of interest to me here is not any field of political choice, but those that aspire to commercial power.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-8-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-8">8</a></sup> Consequently, I recast the political economy of media and its synthesis with cultural studies with the aim of conceptualizing software. Synthesizing these two approaches, I understand the web experience as uniform, the infrastructure and the content as one, and the material and culture as unified. Moreover, I impose upon us the recognition that the ‘interface’ is an important part of the content. The interface is, therefore, understood as a uniform cultural text, which cannot be distinguished from any personal web page on which any given analysis happens to focus. This is why in this article there are no separate discussions of social media industrial powers, coding practices, and the cultural texts that are distributed worldwide, as together they form a behemoth power structure. So the Facebook interface is a non-neutral entity, as a cultural text that aspires to power and that frames specific forms of interaction consumed by millions of users on a daily basis. </p>
			<p>Reading software starts with underlining that such software is produced on a monopoly basis for profit, it is ‘blockbuster software’. Its representational structures and the scripts in which it involves its users represent a central void of governance, given that software is distributed globally on an oligopoly basis. In other words, the representational power on the web is in the hands of a few companies, monopolies that strive for profit. Microsoft monopolizes the consumer software market, with a significant presence in the social media market. Google monopolizes the ‘search’ market and the user content production market (i.e. YouTube and Blogger), while the content production tool market is increasingly monopolized by Adobe.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-9-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-9">9</a></sup></p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">From Universality to Colonization</h3>
			<p>According to the hegemonic discourse coming from the mouths of monopoly companies and new media theory amongst others, the above-described void in governance does not necessarily mean that the actual software embeds values. Such discourses soak arguments in computer design and now software design and their commercial operation. Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala<sup><a id="footnote-299855-10-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-10">10</a></sup> develop arguments against the established view in computer design according to which computers must be designed to be invisible, sailing along with the user, offering a substantively neutral and transparent interface, and simply distributing content. According to Bolter and Gromala, this politically non-viable position established in the design of computers, as well as so-called ‘intelligent’ devices, has the result that operating systems and computers in general are developed within a paradigm that aims to evolve them into neutral extensions of the human body itself, wherefrom one gets popular terms such as ubiquitous computing. </p>
			<p>Bolter and Gromala dispute the ideological basis of the paradigm and develop the argument that this is neither possible nor it is politically sanctionable given that there is no consensus as to which are the human perceptual functions with which computers ought to potentially/virtually ‘sail along’. They ask themselves how have we politically consented to the idea of compliance and not, for example, the idea of awakening. In other words, for Bolter and Gromala computers cannot be ‘transparent’ but on the contrary they constitute fields of interaction and of targeted acts.</p>
			<p>The companies producing such texts exploit and establish the design paradigm described by Bolter and Gromala in commercial web software services. For some time they have been stirring the pot of transparency ideologies: it is ‘where do you want to go today’ not ‘where are we taking you today?’, or ‘we classify knowledge for you’. From processing the social, the partial archiving of pages to hosting free speech on default menus, each corporation presents fragmentary or muddled processes as transparent. In the words of Facebook’s Terms of Use, ‘Facebook is not a website, it’s a way of sharing your information; it’s designed for easily sharing your information with anyone’.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-11-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-11">11</a></sup></p>
			<p>By presenting their functions as technical, or uniform and impartial, these companies deny the blatant monopoly they enjoy and consequently the powers of this monopoly. Like computer designers they proclaim, on the one hand, that their services are designed on the basis of a global knowledge about the ‘structure of perception’ and, on the other, that the constant development of services by the users guarantees this uniformity. Microsoft’s well-known dictum concerning usability is a good example of this logic. In other cases, such as that of Google, the oligopoly is justified simply by supporting the view that the service provided offers purely technical facilitation, and therefore there is no need for competition. Constant references to supposedly global user contributions to the published content again imply that since intermediation on the mass web reaches for and is based on free collective offerings, there is no need for competition. As we only need one Wikipedia, so too we need one and only one YouTube!</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">From Universality to Monopolization</h3>
			<p>This discourse is easy to rebut once one looks at the actual representation of the social media interfaces. There are two values that keep on popping up, values that are interrelated and form the cultural practices we are invited to participate in. The first is universality, and of course the aspiration to hegemony that goes with it. The second is ‘real identity’, ‘social identity’, and the idea that natural/corporal identity should form the cornerstone of our online identities. The virtual is no longer understood as something more than an extension of real social life. Actually, one could say that virtual identity and anonymity are stigmatized through these texts. Role-playing, the virtual as distinct and different from the real, is understood as ‘fake’. The same applies to services that are not aiming to provide texts for some imaginary universal real self, as anchored in this materiality. In Zuckerberg’s words, ‘“The Web is at an important turning point today.” Startups require their users to bring their real identity. “The default is now social”’.<sup><a id="footnote-299855-12-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-12">12</a></sup></p>
			<p>These two ideas work together and feed a dual cultural practice that enables the commercialization of personal data<sup><a id="footnote-299855-13-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-13">13</a></sup> and the transformation of commercial media into a commercial sea of data. Very much embedded in oligopoly social media texts is the idea that a web service aspires to universality, it wants to monopolize our time online and colonize the web. Staring at the Facebook login page one quickly reads such an aspiration: the page is not designed to ‘give away’ the services or content but rather, is a gateway towards something, more like a book cover, an entry point to a network. </p>
			<p>Its strength is further played out by the importance of natural identity for entering this space. The user’s unique identity is key to the network, because unlike any other landing page, the Facebook landing page displays the sign up template featuring seven details of the private self, including date of birth, to its nearly billion subscribed users every time they want to log on, instead of it being displayed only to users who click a link to sign up.</p>
			<p>Although trivial, both these observations are often made by internet natives who used the internet for at least a decade without having to join any other network, as they are already on the network, and who for years didn’t have to trade their personal details for such use. </p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">Structures of Mediation </h3>
			<p class="quote_no-space-after"><em>When companies know more about you, you won’t have to look at advertising for things that don’t interest you. And the companies will know that the right people are seeing the things they sell. ...Your computer will tell the companies about what you’re interested in buying. Or what you’re interested in hearing.</em> </p>
			<p class="quote">– Bill Gates<sup><a id="footnote-299855-14-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-14">14</a></sup></p>
			<p>The strategy for colonizing the web has to a large extent been successful. Oligopoly social media services as well as Google’s indexing services now constitute a uniform interface, the cultural text at the heart of the web. It is as familiar to us as a Hollywood movie, so much so that many of us identify it with the web itself: we refer to our daily structured network experience through Windows, augmented by Explorer, scanned by Google, and enriched by Facebook. Through navigation menus and selection boxes, progress bars, search tools and electronic commerce, the web’s interface narrates back to us, offering us the unique opportunity to become ourselves the heroes of its stories. The web’s interface reflects values across the entire spectrum of the design and functioning of its services. The industrialized mediation it offers standardizes content, on the one hand, through the intense claim for personalization and, on the other, requiring the collection and scanning of increasingly more personal experience and content within the framework of a broader false collectivity. This double axis constitutes the heart of content industrialization on the web and was developed by social media. With this double aim, the common characteristics in products and services offered are firstly the unique sense of control produced through personalization, and secondly, the demand for further production or processing of personal content as part of a collective community of producers. The alibi presented by personalization conceals that in reality one is dealing with a commodification process, during which, slowly but steadily commerce and communication are integrated until they become homogeneous. Through the global interface this commercialization seeks to grasp increasingly more aspects of social life and increasingly more content, all produced by the users themselves.</p>
			<p>The development of social media was the nodal point for the role of personalization in the broader standardization process of communication on the web, mainly because it established the demand for user participation in the production process of standardized collective content. It was also important because it naturalized the commodification of personal data. Personalization is part of communication in social media to such a degree that the personalization (and hence standardization) process itself constitutes the product. Thus, what is about to be individualized is less important than the fact that it will be archived and ‘processed’, and that personal data will be produced via this process.</p>
			<h3 class="text_subtitle">One Script, Many Stories</h3>
			<p>Our online screen is made up of software and services that have the end goal of integrating commercial transactions with commercialized communication and the offering of individualized products combining both. The similarity in the abstractions forming the interfaces of various different social media texts and other types of services, is striking. On the user’s screen all services seem to have been designed in coordination, as if every object were designed to coexist with every other object, telling us the same story. Applications, although vastly different and developed even for different access platforms, comprise a fixed framework within which our local web experience is articulated. The representational foundations of this fixed framework were initially put in place by the original Windows graphic operating system and have been extended and re-shaped by social media. At the epicenter of the Windows cultural text is a graphical interface in which content and information are represented as objects, and all actions of the putatively dominant user are represented as power over these objects. Space is represented as three-dimensional and the user as dominant through the oversimplification of the represented virtual world.</p>
			<p>Oversimplification constitutes a basic characteristic of the text, and so actions such as writing, the opening of files, web browsing, file reading, adding, and listening are all homogenized and represented as similar. In the name of a ‘universal functionality’ and the ‘average’ user (who appears as anything but competent!) everything is oversimplified with the result that the user/hero’s power over the three-dimensional world of information seemingly increases. The user’s movement in three-dimensional space is conceived of as the ‘control’ of objects, control that is of information which through ever-increasing commands is located at the epicenter of the interface and symbolizes the user’s freedom. The personal pronoun ‘my’ represents the user’s power, the epitome of which is the possibility of personalization and the replacement of ‘my’ by the user’s real name. Looking at Facebook’s timeline one can easily read these values, but one can also read the demand for extending these towards everything, the demand for galloping up even more social, virtual and real space. Social media extend and augment these very basic representations to online life, promising even greater freedom, the freedom of managing information inside infinite cyberspace. Encoded within the products and services offered for mass consumption is a combination of graphical environment that simplifies services with the control of information in an amorphous sea of informations. </p>
			<p>Space is re-intermediated through the effort to control three-dimensional objects and time through the ability to extend the script and control a greater number of objects. This extension of control to commerce is naturalized and conceived of as an extension of our narrative freedom. Thus, the freedom that is represented by the user’s ability to move in virtual space in order to control objects is proposed to the user’s ability to buy these objects. Communication on the web can now include product consumption and is represented as the experience for which further processing and ‘object’ production is central.</p>
			<p>Social media texts offer infinite extensions of the same script: freedom of access to ever-increasing ways of processing and controlling information, such as tagging, adding to a list, storing, retrieving, and any other contribution to so-called ‘populocracy’ and collective production of content. According to the script, the interface offers an ever-increasing ability for personalization and control, on the one hand, and on the other, ever-increasing capabilities for contributing to and accessing the ‘collective’. The central narrative axis of the ever-increasing demand for more information is comprised by two skewed sides of the same coin: personalization and collectivity. The rapid development of social media overwrites and clarifies this side of the mass produced text. Through an illusion of personal control we, the users, incrementally produce new episodes of the script in an attempt to participate in a commercialized social process. </p>
			<p>In other words, at the center of the web, not only is one required to collect, store, process and sort objects and experiences that used to be kept apart, but also to co-opt others in a collective production process. Through the process of personalizing communication, represented by a myriad of selection boxes and commands, embedded in the text is the story of a unique hero who authors his or her plot. The personalized web experience involves the production of ever more information, classifying it, dissecting it, and more than anything else offering it to the collective effort of object hierarchization for the common good. In other words, the script’s hero is the unique user, and the plot is comprised of the very ability to control information and the production of further control, and therefore of further versions of the same script. With social media we are called upon to produce new episodes of the same script, ourselves thus approaching the zenith of control. A classic example of such a script is the development of the Facebook app ‘How Well Do You Know Me?’, in which the user personalizes the app called ‘How Well My Friends Know Me’<sup><a id="footnote-299855-15-backlink" class="footnote-link" href="#footnote-299855-15">15</a></sup> and then invites friends to consume it. The personalization of the application on the part of the user is equivalent to one more episode of the same script.</p>
			<p>But the apotheosis of this is the timeline itself, were the user can narrate the story of her/his life with pre-customized and customizable extendable boxes that allow him to tell her/his story in a linear fashion. In other words, the monopoly social media interface is central to the representation of the standardization process as a personalization process. In social media the personalization process, henceforth, constitutes the product itself, as if what is personalized is less important than how it is personalized. New species of information production for information’s sake, new ways of commenting, the adding of tags, processing the personal, and manners of classification are continuously added, requiring the user to specify his or her presence more and more. In social media personalization is so central to the product offered that the product has stopped being commodified, and that is true not only because the user is also involved in the production but because each product literally appears to be different from any other product, having seemingly at least resisted the homogenization of standardization.</p>
			<p>The more the demand for the production of ever more content intensifies, the more the content becomes increasingly personalized and fractionated, extending farther into parts of social life and action, and therefore the intermediating power of social media increases. The standardized services that constitute the product gradually become indistinguishable from the manner in which the user is represented. For example, tagging friends’ posts has become synonymous with communicating with one’s friends. Thus, today for example, the majority of services on the global interface presuppose the standardization of self-representation, with the requirement that users distribute their identity in little boxes that are available when setting up a page. The use of the interface presupposes personalization, otherwise the user is simply not permitted to navigate the mass center of the web.</p>
			<p>Finally, social media not only commercialize social interaction and user-produced content but also define which aspects of social contact, self, and experience, will be commercialized. On Facebook, for example, the personalization process described here becomes available for the conceptual interconnection of the ‘normal’ and ‘digital’ lives of users. In this manner, personalization, production, and storage of knowledge and social experience gradually become part of life in the net. The constant revelation of further standardized details of private life is part of the representation, just as the visualization of the extra-web real self becomes enmeshed in this representation.</p>
			<p class="text-last">These programs and services comprise the heart of the commercial web. The development of social media has established the demand for control, archiving, and the collective production of content, situated at the heart of the script.</p>
			<h6 class="references_title">References </h6>
			<p class="references">Bolter, David Jay and Diane Gromala. <em>Windows and Mirrors Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.</p>
			<p class="references">Ebersman, David A. ‘Letter from Mark Zuckerberg’ in ‘Facebook, Inc Registration Statement on Form S-1’, Securities and Exchange Commission, 1 February 2012, p.67, <a href="http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1326801/000119312512034517/d287954ds1.htm">http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1326801/000119312512034517/d287954ds1.htm</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Fuller, Matthew. <em>Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and Technoculture. Cambridge</em>, MA: MIT Press, 2005. </p>
			<p class="references">_______ (ed.) <em>Software Studies: A Lexicon,</em> Cambridge, MA: Press, 2008.</p>
			<p class="references">Gates, Bill. <em>The Road Ahead</em>,<em> </em>London: Penguin Books, 1996.</p>
			<p class="references">Hall, Stuart. ‘Encoding/decoding’, in Stuart Hall et al. (eds) <em>Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies</em>, London: Hutchinson, 1991, pp. 128-138.</p>
			<p class="references">Lardinois, Frederic. ‘Live Blog: Mark Zuckerberg’s F8 Keynote’, <em>ReadWrite</em>, 21 April 2010, <a href="http://readwrite.com/2010/04/21/live_blog_mark_zuckerbergs_f8_keynote">http://readwrite.com/2010/04/21/live_blog_mark_zuckerbergs_f8_keynote</a>.</p>
			<p class="references">Manovich, Lev. <em>The Language of New Media</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. </p>
			<p class="references">_______. <em>Software Takes Command</em>,<em> </em>Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, forthcoming, <a href="http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2008/11/softbook.html">http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2008/11/softbook.html</a>. </p>
			<p class="references">McChesney, Robert. ‘So Much for the Magic of Technology and the Free Market’, in Andrew Herman and Thomas Swiss (eds) <em>The World Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural Theory,</em> New York: Routledge, 2000, pp. 10-47.</p>
			<p class="references">Nissenbaum, Helen. <em>Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life</em>, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2009.</p>
			<p class="references">Schudson, Michael. <em>The Power of News</em>, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.</p>
			<p class="references-last">Zimmer, Michael. ‘The Externalities of Search 2.0: The Emerging Privacy Threats when the Drive for the Perfect Search Engine meets Web 2.0’, <em>First Monday</em> 13.3 (2008), <a href="http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2136/1944">http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2136/1944</a>. </p>
			<div class="footnotes">
				<h6 class="references_title">Notes</h6>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-1" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-1-backlink">1</a>.&#9;Stated by Mark Zuckerberg on the <em>Charlie Rose </em>television show in November of 2011. Transcribed excerpts available at, <a href="http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/charlie-rose-talks-to-mark-zuckerberg-and-sheryl-sandberg-11102011.html">http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/charlie-rose-talks-to-mark-zuckerberg-and-sheryl-sandberg-11102011.html</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-2" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-2-backlink">2</a>.&#9;David A. Ebersman, ‘Letter from Mark Zuckerberg’, in ‘Facebook, Inc Registration Statement on Form S-1’, Securities and Exchange Commission, 1 February 2012, p. 67, <a href="http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1326801/000119312512034517/d287954ds1.htm">http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1326801/000119312512034517/d287954ds1.htm</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-3" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-3-backlink">3</a>.&#9;For a classic exploration of this paradox see, Michael Schudson, <em>The Power of News</em>, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-4" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-4-backlink">4</a>.&#9;For a look at companies that provide this service see, <a href="http://www.audiencetargeting.com/">http://www.audiencetargeting.com/</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-5" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-5-backlink">5</a>.&#9;Lev Manovich, <em>The Language of New Media</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-6" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-6-backlink">6</a>.&#9;See, for example, Lev Manovich, <em>The Language of New Media</em>; Lev Manovich, <em>Software Takes Command</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, forthcoming, <a href="http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2008/11/softbook.html">http://lab.softwarestudies.com/2008/11/softbook.html</a>; Matthew Fuller, <em>Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and Technoculture</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005; and Matthew Fuller (ed.) <em>Software Studies: A Lexicon</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-7" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-7-backlink">7</a>.&#9;The textual analysis proposed here adopts most of Hall’s analysis. See, Stuart Hall, ‘Encoding/decoding’, in Stuart Hall et al. (ed.) <em>Culture, Media, Language: Working Papers in Cultural Studies</em>, London: Hutchinson, 1991, pp. 128-138.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-8" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-8-backlink">8</a>.&#9;For a solid argument for a political economy analysis with regard to new media see the early writings of Robert McChesney, such as ‘So Much for the Magic of Technology and the Free Market’, in Andrew Herman and Thomas Swiss (eds) <em>The World Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural Theory</em>, New York: Routledge, 2000, pp. 10-47.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-9" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-9-backlink">9</a>.&#9;Microsoft’s revenue for the first half of 2012 was $35.47 billion (see <a href="http://www.microsoft.com/investor/EarningsAndFinancials/Earnings/PressReleaseAndWebcast/FY12/Q4/default.aspx">http://www.microsoft.com/investor/EarningsAndFinancials/Earnings/PressReleaseAndWebcast/FY12/Q4/default.aspx</a>); Google’s revenue for the same period was $22.86 billion (see <a href="http://investor.google.com/earnings.html">http://investor.google.com/earnings.html</a>); Facebook’s revenue was $2.24 billion (see <a href="http://investor.fb.com/results.cfm">http://investor.fb.com/results.cfm</a>); and Adobe’s was $2.17 billion (see <a href="http://www.adobe.com/aboutadobe/invrelations/pdfs/ADBE_10Q_Q212_FINAL_Certified.pdf">http://www.adobe.com/aboutadobe/invrelations/pdfs/ADBE_10Q_Q212_FINAL_Certified.pdf</a>). </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-10" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-10-backlink">10</a>.&#9;Jay David Bolter and Diane Gromala, <em>Windows and Mirrors Interaction Design, Digital Art, and the Myth of Transparency</em>, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-11" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-11-backlink">11</a>.&#9;Found in Facebook’s Terms of Use as stated in October 2009, <a href="http://www.facebook.com/legal/terms">http://www.facebook.com/legal/terms</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-12" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-12-backlink">12</a>.&#9;Spoken by Zuckerberg during his keynote at the F8 Conference on 21 April 2010 at 10:45 am. Recorded on a live blog by Frederic Lardinois, ‘Live Blog: Mark Zuckerberg’s F8 Keynote’, <em>ReadWrite</em>, 21 April 2010, <a href="http://readwrite.com/2010/04/21/live_blog_mark_zuckerbergs_f8_keynote">http://readwrite.com/2010/04/21/live_blog_mark_zuckerbergs_f8_keynote</a>. </p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-13" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-13-backlink">13</a>.&#9;To situate this argument in the discussion of privacy see, Helen Nissenbaum, <em>Privacy in Context:</em> <em>Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life</em>, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2009; and Michael Zimmer, ‘The Externalities of Search 2.0: The Emerging Privacy Threats when the Drive for the Perfect Search Engine meets Web 2.0’, <em>First Monday</em> 13.3 (2008), <a href="http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2136/1944">http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2136/1944</a>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-14" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-14-backlink">14</a>.&#9;Bill Gates, <em>The Road Ahead</em>, London: Penguin Books, 1996, p. 19.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="footnote">
					<p class="xfootnote"><a id="footnote-299855-15" class="footnote-anchor" href="#footnote-299855-15-backlink">15</a>.&#9;See, <a href="http://apps.facebook.com/quizdoyouknowme/">http://apps.facebook.com/quizdoyouknowme/</a>. </p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
